Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew Is
Regulated by Psychosocial Stress and NMDA Receptor Activation
Elizabeth Gould,1 Bruce S. McEwen,1 Patima Tanapat,1 Liisa A. M. Galea,1 and Eberhard Fuchs2
1The Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021, and 2The German Primate Center, 37077 Go? ttingen, Germany
These studies were designed to determine whether adult neurogenesis
occurs in the dentate gyrus of the tree shrew, an
animal phylogenetically between insectivores and primates,
and to explore the possibility that this process is regulated by
stressful experiences and NMDA receptor activation. We performed
immunohistochemistry for cell-specific markers and the
thymidine analog bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), a marker of DNA
synthesis that labels proliferating cells and their progeny, on the
brains of adult tree shrews subjected to psychosocial stress or
NMDA receptor antagonist treatment. Cells that incorporated
BrdU in the dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews were primarily
located in the subgranular zone, had morphological characteristics
of granule neuron precursors, and appeared to divide
within 24 hr after BrdU injection. Three weeks after BrdU injection,
BrdU-labeled cells had neuronal morphology, expressed
the neuronal marker neuron specific enolase, and were incorporated
into the granule cell layer. Vimentin-immunoreactive
radial glia were observed in the dentate gyrus with cell bodies
in the subgranular zone and processes extending into the
granule cell layer.
Exposure to acute psychosocial stress resulted in a rapid
decrease in the number of BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate
gyrus. In contrast, blockade of NMDA receptors, with the
NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801, resulted in an increase in
the number of BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus. These
results indicate that adult neurogenesis occurs in the tree
shrew dentate gyrus and is regulated by a stressful experience
and NMDA receptor activation. Furthermore, we suggest that
these characteristics may be common to most mammalian
species.
Key words: neurogenesis; tree shrew; psychosocial stress;
granule neurons; dentate gyrus; NMDA receptors
In most brain regions, the production of neurons is typically
confined to a discrete developmental period. In contrast, granule
neurons of the dentate gyrus are produced during an extended
period that begins during gestation and spans well into the postnatal
period in all mammalian species that have been examined,
including the mouse, rat, guinea pig, rabbit, cat, and rhesus
monkey (Angevine, 1965; Altman and Das, 1967; Schlessinger et
al., 1975; Rakic and Nowakowski, 1981; Gueneau et al., 1982;
Wyss and Sripanidkulchai, 1985). In the rat, granule neurons
continue to be produced in adulthood from a pool of precursor
cells that reside within the dentate gyrus (Kaplan and Hinds, 1977;
Kaplan and Bell, 1984). The granule neurons produced in adulthood
seem to migrate into the granule cell layer along existing
radial glia, extend axons, make synaptic contacts, and express
neuronal markers (Kaplan and Bell, 1984; Stanfield and Trice,
1988; Cameron et al., 1993; Okano et al., 1993; Kuhn et al., 1996).
The production of granule neurons in the adult rat dentate
gyrus has been shown to be suppressed by adrenal steroids (Cameron
and Gould, 1994) and excitatory input via the NMDA
receptor subtype of glutamate receptors (Cameron et al., 1995).
Because both circulating adrenal steroid levels and glutamatemediated
excitatory input to the hippocampus are enhanced by
stress (Krugers et al., 1993; Moghaddam et al., 1994; Bartanusz et
al., 1995), it is possible that stressful experiences naturally modulate
the production of granule neurons in the dentate gyrus of
adult animals. This possibility is supported by a recent study
showing that cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus of adult rats
can be suppressed by exposure to predator odor, a naturally
aversive experience (Galea et al., 1996).
Although the existence of neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of
adult rhesus monkeys has been dismissed (Eckenhoff and Rakic,
1988), this phenomenon has not been investigated in other species of
primates or tree shrews. The present studies were undertaken to
determine whether granule cell production and its regulation by
stressful experience and excitatory input occur in the dentate gyrus of
the adult tree shrew Tupaia belangeri. Tree shrews, which are considered
to be phylogenetically between insectivores and primates
(Martin, 1990), have been studied extensively in a well characterized
model of psychosocial stress. When paired with a same-sex conspecific,
tree shrews rapidly establish a potent, enduring dominant/
subordinate relationship that is particularly stressful to the subordinate
animal (von Holst, 1972). To determine whether granule cell
production occurs in the dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews, immunohistochemistry
for cell-specific markers and the thymidine analog
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), a marker of DNA synthesis, was performed
on the brains of adult tree shrews exposed to psychosocial
stress or NMDA receptor blockade.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal care and treatment
Adult (7 months to 2.5 years old) male tree shrews (Tupaia belangeri)
from the breeding colony at the German Primate Center (Go?ttingen,
Germany) were used in all experiments. Tree shrews are diurnal animals
that reach sexual maturity between 4 and 5 months and have a lifespan of
up to 12 years in captivity. All animal experimentation was conducted in
accordance with the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Guide for the
Received Oct. 11, 1996; revised Dec. 3, 1996; accepted Jan. 10, 1997.
This work was supported by National Institute of Mental Health Grant MH52423
and a National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression Young
Investigator Award (E.G.). We thank Dr. Gabrielle Flugge for assistance with
templates.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Elizabeth Gould, Department of
Psychology, Green Hall, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544.
Copyright q1997 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/97/172492-07$05.00/0
The Journal of Neuroscience, April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH Publication 85-23, revised
1985) and were approved by the government of Lower Saxony, Germany.
The animals were housed individually on a 12 hr/12 hr light/dark cycle
with artificial illumination from 8:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M. in air conditioned
rooms (for details, see Fuchs and Schumacher, 1990). All treatments were
performed during the day (lights on).
Experiment 1
To determine whether cells in the dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews
incorporate BrdU and divide, tree shrews were given a single i.p. injection
of BrdU [Sigma, St. Louis, MO; 75 mg/kg in saline and 0.007 N NaOH
(this dose was used in all experiments)]. After a survival time of 2 or 24
hr, the tree shrews (n 53 for each group) were anesthetized and perfused
transcardially (see below). The 2 hr survival time allows for incorporation
of BrdU by cells synthesizing DNA but not for completion of mitosis
(Nowakowski et al., 1989). BrdU is available for uptake into cells synthesizing
DNA for approximately 2 hr (Packard et al., 1973). The 24 hr
survival time allows for the completion of at least one cell cycle by cells
in S phase at the time of BrdU injection (Nowakowski et al., 1989).
Experiment 2
To determine whether cells that incorporate BrdU survive and express
the neuronal marker neuron specific enolase (NSE), tree shrews (n 53)
were given a single i.p. injection of BrdU and were anesthetized and
perfused transcardially 3 weeks later. In the dentate gyrus of the adult rat,
mature granule neurons, but not glia, express NSE (Cameron et al.,
1993). The majority of cells newly generated in the dentate gyrus of adult
rats have been shown to express NSE by 3 weeks after incorporation of
[
3
H]thymidine during DNA synthesis (Cameron et al., 1993).
Experiment 3
To determine whether cell proliferation can be modulated by a stressful
experience, tree shrews exposed to acute psychosocial stress were examined
(Fuchs et al., 1996). The experimental induction of psychosocial
conflict was carried out as follows. An opaque partition between the
neighboring cages of two males unknown to one another was removed.
This resulted in active competition for control over the enlarged territory
and the establishment of an obvious dominant/subordinate relationship.
Under these conditions, the subordinate animal became virtually immobile,
showed tail ruffling, and elicited alarm cries, whereas the dominant
tree shrew maintained a normal level and sphere of activity. After 1 hr,
the animals were separated again by the opaque partition and the
subordinate tree shrews (n 53) were given injections of BrdU. Subordinate
tree shrews demonstrate elevated urinary cortisol levels at this
time point compared with both control and dominant tree shrews (Magarinos
et al., 1996). Two hours after BrdU injection, the animals were
anesthetized and perfused transcardially. These animals were compared
to tree shrews (n 53) that were not exposed to a stressful experience but
received a single BrdU injection, followed by a 2 hr survival time.
Experiment 4
To determine whether the production of cells in the dentate gyrus of
adult tree shrews is affected by NMDA receptor activation, tree shrews
were given injections of the specific noncompetitive NMDA receptor
antagonist MK-801 (1.0 mg/kg in saline, i.p.; gift of Merck Research
Laboratories, Rahway, NJ) or saline (n 53 for each group). This dose has
been shown to stimulate granule cell production in the dentate gyrus of
adult rats (Cameron et al., 1995). Two hours after MK-801 treatment, the
animals were given injections of BrdU and were anesthetized and perfused
transcardially after a 2 hr survival time.
Histological procedures
After treatments, the tree shrews received an overdose of Rompum/
Ketanest and were perfused transcardially with 4.0% paraformaldehyde
in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB). The heads were postfixed overnight, and
the brains were removed from the skulls on the following day. Brain
sections (40 mm) were cut on an oscillating tissue slicer in a bath of PB.
BrdU and vimentin immunohistochemistry
For BrdU immunohistochemistry, the sections were permeabilized with
0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS for 1 hr, incubated with Pronase E (3
mg/ml) in PBS at 378C for 20 min, denatured in 2 N HCL for 20 min,
rinsed twice in PBS, and incubated overnight at 48C with monoclonal
antibody (mAb) against BrdU (Novocastra, Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom; 1:100 in PBS). The sections were rinsed in PBS, incubated for
1 hr in biotinylated mouse secondary antisera (Vector Laboratories,
Burlingame, CA; 1:50 in PBS), rinsed in PBS, incubated for 1 hr in
avidin? biotin? horseradish peroxidase (Vector, 1:50 in PBS), rinsed in
PBS, and reacted with diaminobenzidine and hydrogen peroxide in PBS.
After rinsing in PBS, the sections were mounted onto gelatinized glass
slides and stained for Nissl using cresyl violet.
Some brain sections that were not stained for BrdU were incubated
overnight in mAb against vimentin (Boehringer Mannheim, Indianapolis,
IN; clone V9, 1:50 in PBS). Vimentin, a cytoskeletal protein of immature
astroglia, is expressed by radial glia in the dentate gyrus of adult rats
(Gould et al., 1992). After this, the sections were processed for avidin?
biotin? horseradish peroxidase immunohistochemistry as described above
for BrdU staining.
Combined BrdU and NSE immunohistochemistry
Two different combined immunohistochemical methods were used to
visualize BrdU and NSE on the same brain section. In the first method,
the sections were reacted for BrdU immunohistochemistry as described
above. After several rinses in PBS, the sections were incubated overnight
in polyclonal antisera against NSE (Polysciences, Warrington, PA; 1:2000
in PBS). The sections were then rinsed in PBS and incubated for 2 hr in
FITC-conjugated rabbit antisera (Vector, 1:50 in PBS) with goat normal
serum, rinsed again, and mounted onto gelatinized slides and coverslipped
under Crystal Mount (Biomeda Corp., Foster City CA). In the
second method, the sections were reacted for BrdU immunohistochemistry
as described above, with the exception that the solution of diaminobenzidine
and hydrogen peroxide in PBS contained 2.5% nickel sulfate.
The sections were then rinsed several times in PBS and incubated
overnight in polyclonal antisera against NSE (Polysciences, 1:2000 in
PBS). After several rinses in PBS, the sections were incubated for 1 hr in
biotinylated rabbit antisera and reacted using the avidin? biotin? horseradish
peroxidase protocol as described above.
Data analysis
For each experiment, the slides were coded before quantitative analysis,
and the code was not broken until the analysis was complete. For
each brain, at least six sections were selected for analysis from middle
to caudal dentate gyrus (between levels A 2.0 and A 3.0; see Tigges and
Shantha, 1969). For each selected section, the number of BrdU-labeled
cells was counted in the dentate gyrus [the granule cell layer (gcl) and
hilus combined]. The cross-sectional area of the dentate gyrus was
determined by use of a Zeiss Interactive Digitizing Analysis System
(ZIDAS), and the data were expressed as densities (number of cells/
mm2
). Means were determined for these variables, and the data were
subjected to two-tailed Student?s t tests. For brain sections immunostained
for both BrdU and NSE, the percentage of BrdU-labeled cells
that were NSE-immunoreactive was determined.
RESULTS
BrdU incorporation in the dentate gyrus of adult tree
shrews with 2 hr or 24 hr survival times
The dentate gyrus of tree shrews processed for BrdU immunohistochemistry
at 2 and 24 hr survival times after BrdU injection revealed
BrdU-labeled cells throughout the dentate gyrus at all levels examined
(Figs. 1?3). These cells were typically observed in the subgranular
zone (sgz), on the border of the gcl and the hilus (Figs. 1? 4), as
well as within the gcl and hilus. There were no obvious differences in
the distribution of BrdU-immunoreactive cells at different levels of
the dentate gyrus for either time point (Figs. 1?3).
Most of the BrdU-labeled cells (;85%) had the morphological
characteristics of granule cell precursors, i.e., round or oval,
medium-sized cell bodies (Fig. 4). The remaining BrdUimmunoreactive
cells had the morphological characteristics of
glial cells, i.e., triangular or irregular, small cell bodies. Quantitative
analysis revealed a significant increase in the number of
BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus (.2 times) between 2 and
24 hr after BrdU injection [t(4) 5 27.337; p ,0.005, see Table 1].
Despite this increase in cell number, the location of the BrdUlabeled
cells did not change between 2 and 24 hr (Figs. 1?3).
Gould et al. ? Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew J. Neurosci., April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498 2493
Moreover, the cross-sectional area of the dentate gyrus did not
change between 2 and 24 hr after BrdU injection (2 hr 51.5 6
0.02 mm2
, 24 hr 51.5 60.01 mm2
; p ,0.4).
Vimentin immunoreactivity in the dentate gyrus of
adult tree shrews
Light microscopic examination of vimentin-immunoreactive tissue
revealed numerous stained cells with the morphological characteristics
of radial glia, i.e., triangular shaped cell bodies with radial
processes (Fig. 4). These cells were usually oriented with the cell
bodies in the sgz and the processes extending through the gcl
(Fig. 4). There were no detectable differences in the distribution
of vimentin-immunoreactive cells at different levels of the dentate
gyrus.
Combined BrdU and NSE immunohistochemistry after
a 3 week survival time
Three weeks after BrdU injection, numerous BrdU-labeled cells
(;20 per section) remained detectable in the dentate gyrus (Figs.
1?3). These cells were located predominantly in the gcl, although
Figure 1. Template showing a coronal half-section of the tree shrew brain at level A 3.0 (see Tigges and Shantha, 1969), demonstrating that the number
and distribution of BrdU-labeled cells (open circles) change with increased survival time after BrdU injection. Two hours after BrdU injection, most
labeled cells are located in the sgz, on the border of the gcl and hilus. Twenty-four hours after BrdU injection, more than twice as many BrdU-labeled
cells are observed in the dentate gyrus, predominantly in the sgz. By 3 weeks after BrdU injection, most BrdU-labeled cells are located in the gcl and
express NSE (solid dots). cc, Corpus callosum; lv, lateral ventricle; 3V, third ventricle; h, hilus; CA1, CA1 region; CA3, CA3 region.
Figure 2. Template showing a coronal half-section of the tree shrew brain at level A 2.5 (see Tigges and Shantha, 1969), showing changes in the number
and distribution of BrdU-labeled cells (open circles) with increased survival time after BrdU injection. Two hours after BrdU injection, most labeled cells
are located in the sgz, between the gcl and hilus. Twenty-four hours after BrdU injection, more than two times as many BrdU-labeled cells are observed
in the dentate gyrus, but their distribution remains similar to the 2 hr time point. Three weeks after BrdU injection, most BrdU-labeled cells are located
in the gcl and are NSE-immunoreactive (solid dots). cc, Corpus callosum; lv, lateral ventricle; 3V, third ventricle; h, hilus; CA1, CA1 region; CA3, CA3
region.
2494 J. Neurosci., April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498 Gould et al. ? Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew
a few remained in the sgz and hilus. Both immunohistochemical
methods for double labeling BrdU and NSE yielded similar results;
;80% of the BrdU-labeled cells were NSEimmunoreactive.
All of the cells that were labeled with BrdU and
NSE were located in the gcl (Figs. 1?3) and had the morphological
characteristics of granule neurons.
Effects of psychosocial stress on the number of BrdUlabeled
cells in the dentate gyrus
Exposure to a single episode of acute psychosocial stress that
lasted 1 hr resulted in a significant decrease in the density of
BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus compared to unstressed
controls [t(4) 5 23.807; p ,0.05; Table 1]. No change in the
cross-sectional area of the dentate gyrus was observed after acute
psychosocial stress (control 51.5 60.5 mm2
, stress 51.2 60.4
mm2
; p ,0.4), indicating that this difference reflects a change in
the number of proliferating cells. The morphological characteristics
of BrdU-labeled cells did not differ between the tree shrews
subjected to psychosocial stress and unstressed control animals.
Effects of NMDA receptor antagonist treatment on the
number of BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus
Treatment with the NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801 resulted
in a significant increase in the density of BrdU-labeled cells in the
dentate gyrus [t(4) 5 22.945, p ,0.05; Table 1). No change in the
cross-sectional area of the dentate gyrus was observed after MKFigure
3. Template showing a coronal half-section of the tree shrew brain at level A 2.0 (see Tigges and Shantha, 1969), indicating changes in the number
and distribution of BrdU-labeled cells (open circles) with increased survival time after BrdU injection. Most BrdU-labeled cells are located in the sgz,
between the gcl and hilus at the 2 and 24 hr time points. Three weeks after BrdU injection, most BrdU-labeled cells are located in the gcl and are
NSE-immunoreactive (solid dots). cc, Corpus callosum; 3V, third ventricle; h, hilus; CA1, CA1 region; CA3, CA3 region.
Figure 4. Examples of cell types in the dentate
gyrus of the adult tree shrew. A, BrdUlabeled
cell (arrows) in the sgz of the dentate
gyrus with morphological characteristics of
granule cell precursor, i.e., round or oval
medium-sized cell body. B, Cluster of BrdUlabeled
cells (arrows) in the sgz of the dentate
gyrus after MK-801 treatment. C, Vimentinimmunoreactive
cell with radial glial morphology,
i.e., irregular shaped cell body with
radial process. The cell body is located on the
border of the hilus and gcl, and the process
extends through the gcl. g, Granule cell layer;
h, hilus. Scale bar in B, 20 mm (applies to all
frames).
Gould et al. ? Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew J. Neurosci., April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498 2495
801 treatment (control 51.4 60.3 mm2
; MK-801-treated 51.1 6
0.2 mm2
; p ,0.4). In MK-801-treated tree shrews, BrdU-labeled
cells had morphological characteristics that were similar to those
of controls, and these cells were often observed in clusters of 3?5
on the border of the gcl and hilus (Fig. 4).
DISCUSSION
The results of this report demonstrate that cells in the dentate
gyrus of adult tree shrews incorporate BrdU, a marker of DNA
synthesis that labels proliferating cells and their progeny. The
observation that the number of BrdU-labeled cells more than
doubles between 2 and 24 hr suggests that cells synthesizing DNA
in the dentate gyrus divide at least once within a 24 hr period.
Furthermore, the detection of BrdU-labeled cells that express a
neuronal marker and have granule cell morphology 3 weeks after
BrdU incorporation suggests that many proliferating cells in the
dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews eventually become granule
neurons. Moreover, the presence of radial glia with cell bodies in
the sgz and processes extending through the gcl, as well as the
change in location of BrdU-labeled cells from 24 hr to 3 weeks,
suggests that newly generated cells migrate from the hilus or sgz
to the gcl. Finally, these results also show that the production of
cells in the dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews can be modulated
rapidly by exposure to a stressful social encounter, as well as by
changing the level of NMDA receptor activation.
Granule cell generation across mammalian species
Previous studies have demonstrated several characteristics of dentate
gyrus granule cell production that are common to numerous
mammalian species, from rats to rhesus monkeys. First, granule
cell production occurs during an extended period that begins
during gestation and continues into the postnatal period (Schlessinger
et al., 1975; Rakic and Nowakowski, 1981; Altman and
Bayer, 1990a,b). This feature seems to be unrelated to the degree
of maturity at birth as both altricial species (e.g., the rat) and
precocial species (e.g., the guinea pig) demonstrate this phenomenon
(Altman and Das, 1967; Schlessinger et al., 1975). Second,
suprapyramidal to infrapyramidal and outside-in gradients of
granule cell generation exist (Schlessinger et al., 1975; Rakic and
Nowakowski, 1981). Third, the location of granule cell precursors
changes during development; precursor cells originate in the
subependymal layer, next reside in the hilus, and finally in the sgz
(Rakic and Nowakowski, 1981; Altman and Bayer, 1990a,b). However,
there are characteristics of granule cell production that are
not shared by all mammals examined. One prominent difference
in granule cell generation between the rat and the monkey is in
the developmental stage at which the majority of neurons are
produced. In the rat, most (;80%) granule cells are produced
postnatally, whereas in the rhesus monkey, most are produced
prenatally (Schlessinger et al., 1975; Rakic and Nowakowski,
1981).
The extension of granule neuron production into adulthood has
been well documented in the rat (Kaplan and Bell, 1984; Stanfield
and Trice, 1988; Cameron et al., 1993; Okano et al., 1993) and
recently demonstrated in the meadow vole, another species of
rodent (Galea and McEwen, 1995). In contrast, few studies have
investigated the possibility that adult neurogenesis occurs in the
dentate gyrus of nonrodent mammalian species. One report dismissed
the possibility that granule cells are produced in adulthood
in the dentate gyrus of rhesus monkeys and suggested that adult
neurogenesis is a phenomenon unique to rats, particularly strains
that increase in size throughout life (Eckenhoff and Rakic, 1988).
However, it is unlikely that considerable growth in adulthood is
the basis for adult neurogenesis because the guinea pig, an animal
that undergoes little brain growth during the postnatal period,
appears to produce granule neurons in adulthood (Altman and
Das, 1967). Rather, it appears that the mammalian dentate gyrus
is a specialized brain region in which neurogenesis continues into
adulthood regardless of the developmental pattern of the animal.
In light of recent findings, the possibility that adult neurogenesis
occurs in the dentate gyrus of most mammals, including other
primate species, should be reconsidered. First, the results of this
study have demonstrated granule neuron production and its regulation
by neural activity and behavioral events in the dentate
gyrus of the adult tree shrew. Second, we have observed BrdUlabeled
cells with the morphology of immature granule neurons,
as well as vimentin-immunoreactive radial glia, in the dentate
gyrus of adult marmoset monkeys (Callithrix jacchus) and an adult
cynomolgus (Macaca fascicularis) monkey (our unpublished observations).
Moreover, the recent observations that precursor cells
capable of generating neurons exist in the subependymal layer of
adult humans (Kirschenbaum et al., 1994) suggest a reevaluation
of the limits of neurogenesis across species in other regions
as well.
Significance of radial glia in the adult brain
During development, radial glia are believed to participate in the
migration of immature neurons from their site of origin to their
final destination. The results of this study and our previous report
(Gould et al., 1992) indicate that the dentate gyrus maintains a
population of radial glia in adulthood in both the tree shrew and
rat. In addition, cells produced in the dentate gyrus of both the
tree shrew and the rat (Cameron et al., 1993) move from the hilus
or sgz to the gcl after DNA synthesis, suggesting that radial glia
guide migrating granule cells in adulthood. It should be noted,
though, that the processes of radial glia are considerably longer
than the distances immature granule cells appear to migrate in the
adult. A recent report indicates that radial glia in the dentate
gyrus of adult rats are associated with the dendrites of immature
granule neurons (Seki and Arai, 1996), presenting the possibility
Table 1. The number of proliferating cells in the dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews at different survival times after BrdU injection, as well as after
psychosocial stress or MK-801 treatment
Number of BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus/mm2
Time course experiment Stress experiment MK-801 experiment
2 hr 24 hr Control Subordinate Control MK-801
7.9 61.5 22.7 61.3* 6.8 61.3* 1.6 60.3* 11.8 62.1 19.8 61.7*
Values represent mean 6SEM each obtained from three tree shrews. Asterisks represent significant difference from 2 hr (time course experiment) or control (stress or MK-801
experiment); p ,0.05, unpaired Student?s t tests.
2496 J. Neurosci., April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498 Gould et al. ? Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew
that radial glia may serve other developmental functions, in addition
to migration, such as supporting the growing dendritic tree.
NMDA receptor activation regulates cell proliferation
The results of this study also suggest that intrinsic factors regulating
the production of granule neurons in the adult dentate
gyrus may be common to mammalian species that undergo adult
neurogenesis. Treatment with MK-801, a noncompetitive NMDA
receptor antagonist, resulted in a rapid increase in the number of
cells synthesizing DNA, suggesting that NMDA receptor activation
normally inhibits cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus of the
tree shrew. These results are consistent with our previous studies
demonstrating that NMDA receptor blockade or activation increases
or decreases, respectively, the production of granule cells
in the dentate gyrus of adult rats (Cameron et al., 1995). Excitation
may inhibit neurogenesis by preventing the synthesis or
release of mitogenic factors from cells in the vicinity of precursor
cells. Several studies have shown that stressful experiences rapidly
stimulate glutamate release and alter the expression of NMDA
receptors in the hippocampus of the rat (Krugers et al., 1993;
Moghaddam et al., 1994; Bartanusz et al., 1995). Collectively,
these results suggest that stressful experiences inhibit the production
of granule neurons via actions on excitatory pathways to the
dentate gyrus.
Psychosocial stress inhibits cell proliferation
The functional consequences of adult neurogenesis in the dentate
gyrus are presently unknown. One approach to elucidating the
function of granule neuron production in adulthood is to identify
the factors that regulate its occurrence. The results of this study
have shown that a brief exposure to psychosocial stress, during
which a dominant/subordinate relationship is established, results
in a rapid decrease in the number of cells that incorporate BrdU
in the dentate gyrus of the subordinate animal. After a single
encounter with a dominant tree shrew, the subordinate will remain
in a constant state of arousal in the presence of the dominant
animal. This stress reaction is characterized by a reduced
sphere of activity, vigilance, alarm cries, and tail ruffling (von
Holst, 1972). When removed from the presence of the dominant
after the initial encounter, subordinate tree shrews will recover
physically but will demonstrate immediate stress reactions after
subsequent exposures to the dominant (von Holst, 1972), indicating
that a potent memory of the experience has been formed.
Because the hippocampus has been implicated in spatial learning
and memory (Sutherland et al., 1983; Wishaw, 1987; McNaughton
et al., 1989), as well as in contextual learning in conditioned fear
paradigms (Phillips and LeDoux, 1992), it is possible that stressinduced
stabilization of the granule cell population may be necessary
for learning during a threatening social encounter. The
production of new granule neurons for increased storage capacity
may be permitted only during periods of low stress when learning
is not critical.
In the tree shrew, the stress of subordination is mediated by
visual and not olfactory cues; exposure to the olfactory markings
or the odor of the dominant does not elicit a reaction (von Holst,
1972). We have shown that exposure of adult rats to fox odor,
which increases both adrenal steroid levels and excitatory input
(Heale et al., 1994; Vernet-Maury et al., 1984), rapidly inhibits cell
proliferation in the dentate gyrus (Galea et al., 1996). Collectively,
these findings suggest that rapid suppression of cell proliferation
by a threatening experience, conveyed via cues from different
sensory modalities, is a characteristic of the dentate gyrus that is
common to mammalian species that undergo adult neurogenesis.
REFERENCES
Altman J, Bayer SA (1990a) Mosaic organization of the hippocampal
neuroepithelium and the multiple germinal sources of dentate granule
cells. J Comp Neurol 301:325?342.
Altman J, Bayer SA (1990b) Migration and distribution of two populations
of hippocampal granule cell precursors during the perinatal and
postnatal periods. J Comp Neurol 301:365?381.
Altman J, Das GD (1967) Postnatal neurogenesis in the guinea-pig.
Nature 214:1098 ?1101.
Angevine JB (1965) Time of neuron origin in the hippocampal region: an
autoradiographic study in the mouse. Exp Neurol 2:1?17.
Bartanusz V, Aubry J-M, Pagliusi S, Jezova D, Baffi J, Kiss JZ (1995)
Stress-induced changes in messenger RNA levels of N-methyl-Daspartate
and AMPA receptor subunits in selected regions of the rat
hippocampus and hypothalamus. Neuroscience 66:247?252.
Cameron HA, Gould E (1994) Adult neurogenesis is regulated by adrenal
steroids in the dentate gyrus. Neuroscience 61:203?209.
Cameron HA, McEwen BS, Gould E (1995) Regulation of adult neurogenesis
by excitatory input and NMDA receptor activation in the
dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 15:4687? 4692.
Cameron HA, Woolley CS, McEwen BS, Gould E (1993) Differentiation
of newly born neurons and glia in the dentate gyrus of the adult rat.
Neuroscience 56:337?344.
Eckenhoff MF, Rakic P (1988) Nature and fate of proliferative cells in
the hippocampal dentate gyrus during the life span of the rhesus
monkey. J Neurosci 8:2729 ?2747.
Fuchs E, Schumacher M (1990) Psychosocial stress affects pineal function
in the tree shrew (Tupaia belangeri). Physiol Behav 47:713?717.
Fuchs E, Kramer M, Hermes B, Netter B, Hiemke C (1996) Psychosocial
stress in tree shrews: clomipramine counteracts behavioral and endocrine
changes. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 54:219 ?228.
Galea LAM, McEwen BS (1995) Sex differences in adult neurogenesis in
the wild-trapped meadow vole. Soc Neurosci Abstr 21:1287.
Galea LAM, Tanapat P, Gould E (1996) Exposure to predator odor
suppresses cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus of adult rats via a
cholinergic mechanism. Soc Neurosci Abstr 22:1196.
Gould E, Cameron HA, Daniels DC, Woolley CS, McEwen BS (1992)
Adrenal hormones suppress cell division in the adult rat dentate gyrus.
J Neurosci 12:3642?3650.
Gueneau G, Privat A, Drouet J, Court L (1982) Subgranular zone of the
dentate gyrus of young rabbits as a secondary matrix. Dev Neurosci
5:345?358.
Heale VR, Vanderwolf CH, Kavaliers M (1994) Components of weasel
and fox odors elicit fast wave bursts in the dentate gyrus of rats. Behav
Brain Res 63:159 ?165.
Kaplan MS, Bell DH (1984) Mitotic neuroblasts in the 9-day-old and
11-month-old rodent hippocampus. J Neurosci 4:1429 ?1441.
Kaplan MS, Hinds JW (1977) Neurogenesis in the adult rat: electron
microscopic analysis of light radioautographs. Science 197:1092?1094.
Kirschenbaum B, Nedergaard M, Preuss A, Barami K, Fraser RA, Goldman
SA (1994) In vitro neuronal production and differentiation by
precursor cells derived from the adult human forebrain. Cereb Cortex
4:576 ?589.
Krugers HJ, Koolhaas JM, Bohua B, Korf J (1993) A single stress experience
alters glutamate receptor-binding in rat hippocampal CA3 area.
Neurosci Lett 154:73?77.
Kuhn HG, Dickinson-Anson H, Gage FH (1996) Neurogenesis in the
dentate gyrus of the adult rat: age-related decrease in neuronal progenitor
population. J Neurosci 16:2027?2033.
Magarinos AM, McEwen BS, Flugge G, Fuchs E (1996) Chronic psychosocial
stress causes apical dendritic atrophy of hippocampal CA3 pyramidal
neurons in subordinate tree shrews. J Neurosci 16:3534 ?3540.
Martin RD (1990) Primate origins and evolution. London: Chapman &
Hall.
McNaughton BL, Barnes CA, Meltzer J, Sutherland RJ (1989) Hippocampal
granule cells are necessary for normal spatial learning but not
for spatially-selective pyramidal cell discharge. Exp Brain Res
76:485? 496.
Moghaddam B, Boliano ML, Stein-Behrens B, Sapolsky R (1994) Glucocorticoids
mediate the stress-induced extracellular accumulation of
glutamate. Brain Res 655:251?154.
Nowakowski RS, Lewin SB, Miller MW (1989) Bromodeoxyuridine immunohistochemical
determination of the lengths of the cell cycle and
the DNA-synthetic phase for an anatomically defined population.
J Neurocytol 18:311?318.
Gould et al. ? Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew J. Neurosci., April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498 2497
Okano HJ, Pfaff DW, Gibbs RB (1993) RB and Cdc2 expression in brain:
correlations with [3
H]thymidine incorporation and neurogenesis. J Neurosci
13:2930 ?2938.
Packard DS, Menzies RA, Skalko RG (1973) Incorporation of thymidine
and its analog, bromodeoxyuridine, into embryos and maternal tissues
of the mouse. Differentiation 1:397? 405.
Phillips RG, LeDoux JE (1992) Differential contribution of amygdala
and hippocampus to cued and contextual fear conditioning. Behav
Neurosci 106:274 ?285.
Rakic P, Nowakowski RS (1981) The time of origin of neurons in the
hippocampal region of the rhesus monkey. J Comp Neurol 196:99 ?128.
Schlessinger AR, Cowan WM, Gottlieb DI (1975) An autoradiographic
study of the time of origin and the pattern of granule cell migration in
the dentate gyrus of the rat. J Comp Neurol 159:159 ?176.
Seki T, Arai Y (1996) Dendritic development of newly-generated granule
cells in the adult hippocampus occurs upon contact with radial glia-like
cells. Soc Neurosci Abstr 22:534.
Stanfield BB, Trice JE (1988) Evidence that granule cells generated in
the dentate gyrus of adult rats extend axonal projections. Exp Brain Res
72:399 ? 406.
Sutherland RJ, Whishaw IQ, Kolb B (1983) A behavioural analysis of
spatial localization following electrolytic, kainate- or colchicine-induced
damage to the hippocampal formation in the rat. Behav Brain Res
7:133?153.
Tigges J, Shantha TR (1969) A stereotaxic atlas of the tree shrew (Tupaia
glis). Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
Vernet-Maury E, Polak EH, Demael A (1984) Structure-activity relationship
of stress-inducing odorants in the rat. J Chem Ecol
10:1007?1019.
von Holst D (1972) Social stress in the tree-shrew: its causes and physiological
and ethological consequences. In: Prosimian biology (Martin
RD, Doyle GA, Walker AC, eds), pp 389 ? 411. Philadelphia: University
of Pittsburgh.
Whishaw IQ (1987) Hippocampal, granule cell and CA3? 4 lesions impair
formation of a place learning-set in the rat and induce reflex
epilepsy. Behav Brain Res 24:59 ?72.
Wyss JM, Sripanidkulchai B (1985) The development of Ammon?s horn
and the fascia dentata in the cat: a [3
H]thymidine analysis. Brain Res
350:185?198.

Orientation Selectivity and the Arrangement of Horizontal
Connections in Tree Shrew Striate Cortex
William H. Bosking, Ying Zhang, Brett Schofield, and David Fitzpatrick
Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710
Horizontal connections, formed primarily by the axon collaterals
of pyramidal neurons in layer 2/3 of visual cortex, extend for
millimeters parallel to the cortical surface and form patchy
terminations. Previous studies have provided evidence that the
patches formed by horizontal connections exhibit modular
specificity, preferentially linking columns of neurons with similar
response characteristics, such as preferred orientation. The
issue of how these connections are distributed with respect to
the topographic map of visual space, however, has not been
resolved. Here we combine optical imaging of intrinsic signals
with small extracellular injections of biocytin to assess quantitatively
the specificity of horizontal connections with respect to
both the map of orientation preference and the map of visual
space in tree shrew V1. Our results indicate that horizontal
connections outside a radius of 500 mm from the injection site
exhibit not only modular specificity, but also specificity for axis
of projection. Labeled axons extend for longer distances, and
give off more terminal boutons, along an axis in the map of
visual space that corresponds to the preferred orientation of the
injection site. Inside of 500 mm, the pattern of connections is
much less specific, with boutons found along every axis, contacting
sites with a wide range of preferred orientations. The
system of long-range horizontal connections can be summarized
as preferentially linking neurons with co-oriented, coaxially
aligned receptive fields. These observations suggest
specific ways that horizontal circuits contribute to the response
properties of layer 2/3 neurons and to mechanisms of visual
perception.
Key words: orientation selectivity; topography; optical imaging;
visual cortex; surround effects; tree shrew; biocytin; horizontal
connections
Horizontal connections are a prominent feature of the intrinsic
circuitry of the visual cortex. These connections originate primarily
from pyramidal cells, extend for 2?5 mm parallel to the cortical
surface, and terminate in a highly selective and patchy manner
(Gilbert and Wiesel, 1979, 1983; Rockland and Lund, 1982). A
number of experiments have focused on the relationship between
the patches formed by horizontal connections and well known
modular features of cortical organization such as orientation
columns, ocular dominance columns and cytochrome oxidase-rich
blobs (Livingstone and Hubel, 1984; T?so et al., 1986; Gilbert and
Wiesel, 1989; Malach et al., 1993). The results from these experiments
suggest that the patchy nature of horizontal connections
can be explained by a simple rule: horizontal connections link
together select subsets of neurons that share similar receptive
field properties. Studies in both cat and monkey visual cortex, for
example, have shown that horizontal connections selectively link
patches of neurons that have similar orientation preferences (Gilbert
and Wiesel, 1989; Malach et al., 1993).
The relationship of horizontal connections to another fundamental
aspect of cortical organization?the orderly map of visual
space?is less clear. This issue is of interest because the axon
arbors of individual neurons are often elongated across the cortical
surface, extending further and giving rise to more terminals
along one axis of the map than others (Gilbert and Wiesel, 1983,
1989; Matsubara et al., 1985, 1987; McGuire et al., 1991; Kisvarday
and Eysel, 1992; Amir et al., 1993, Malach et al., 1993). Furthermore,
the results of several physiological and perceptual studies have led to
the suggestion that the effects mediated by horizontal connections
are not distributed randomly about a point in visual space, but are
aligned along an axis that corresponds to a neuron?s preferred
orientation. For example, a collinear arrangement of horizontal
connections has been implicated in the construction of the elongated
receptive fields of layer 6 neurons in cat striate cortex (Bolz and
Gilbert, 1989). Likewise, perceptual studies of contour integration
and physiological studies of receptive field surround effects in layer
2/3 neurons have provided evidence for facilitatory effects that are
much stronger in regions of visual space that lie along the axis of
preferred orientation than in regions that lie off this axis (Nelson and
Frost, 1985; Fiorani et al., 1992; Field et al., 1993; Polat and Sagi,
1993; Kapadia et al., 1995). Despite the evidence for anisotropic
physiological and psychophysical effects, the relationship between the
axis of elongation of horizontal connections and the orientation
preference of the neurons they interconnect has never been systematically
examined.
In the experiments described here, we have combined optical
imaging of intrinsic signals with small extracellular injections of
biocytin to quantitatively assess both the modular and axial arrangement
of horizontal connections established by neurons of
known orientation preference in layer 2/3 of tree shrew striate
cortex. Our results demonstrate a remarkable degree of specificity
for both features of horizontal connectivity, and suggest several
ways that horizontal connections could contribute to the response
properties of layer 2/3 neurons.
Received Aug. 5, 1996; revised Dec. 9, 1996; accepted Dec. 12, 1996.
This work was supported by National Eye Institute Grant EY06821. We thank
Martha Foster for expert assistance with histology and plotting of bouton data, Mike
Weliky for assistance with software, and Len White, Michele Pucak, and Justin
Crowley for comments on this manuscript.
Correspondence should be addressed to William H. Bosking, Box 3209, Department
of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.
Copyright q1997 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/97/172112-16$05.00/0
The Journal of Neuroscience, March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental design. Small extracellular injections of biocytin were made
in 13 animals. Distributions of labeled boutons resulting from the injections
were plotted and analyzed manually (3 cases) or with the assistance
of a computer reconstruction system and software routines written in our
lab (10 cases, see below for details). Analysis of modular specificity of the
bouton distributions was accomplished in 7 of these 10 cases by using
optical imaging of intrinsic signals to determine the map of orientation
preference in V1 before injection of the biocytin. Analysis of the bouton
distributions with respect to the map of visual space was accomplished in
all 13 of the cases. Optical imaging was also used to investigate the
geometry of the map of visual space in three animals that were not used
for analysis of specificity of connections.
Animal surgery. Tree shrews were initially anesthetized with a mixture
of ketamine hydrochloride (200 mg/kg) and xylazine (4.7 mg/kg) given by
intramuscular injection. Atropine sulfate (0.08 mg) was given subcutaneously
to reduce secretions. An intraperitoneal cannula was inserted,
the trachea intubated, and the animal was placed in a modified
stereotaxic frame allowing unobstructed viewing of the stimulus monitor.
During surgery, anesthesia was maintained with a 2:1 mixture of N2O/O2
supplemented with 2% halothane. Body temperature was maintained
with a thermostatically controlled heating blanket. The eyes were kept
moist by using planar contact lenses. An incision was made in the scalp,
muscle and fascia reflected, and the bone overlying visual cortex was
thinned by scraping with a fine scalpel. Wound margins and incisions were
treated with a long-acting local anesthetic (bupivacaine) and pressure
points were treated with a lidocaine ointment. The animal was paralyzed
using pancuronium bromide (0.8 mg initial dose for first 1.5 hr, then 0.2
mg/hr) administered through the intraperitoneal cannula to prevent eye
movements, and artificially respired at a rate and volume sufficient to
maintain expired CO2 at 3? 4%. During optical imaging, halothane levels
were reduced to 1%, and the N2O/O2 mixture to 1:1. Any signs of distress
evident in the electrocardiogram or expired CO2 were treated by immediately
increasing the level of halothane.
Optical imaging. Optical imaging of intrinsic signals was accomplished
using an enhanced video acquisition system (Optical Imaging Inc.) applying
techniques similar to those of Grinvald and colleagues (Grinvald et
al., 1986; Bonhoeffer and Grinvald, 1991, 1993). Images were obtained
directly through the thinned bone overlying the V1 area. The cortex was
illuminated with orange light (605 nm) and visualized with a tandem lens
macroscope attached to a low noise video camera. Visual stimulation for
optical imaging was provided by a separate stimulus computer (386 PC
with SGT1graphics board and STIM software provided by Kaare Christian).
The stimuli used consisted of high-contrast square wave gratings
(6.258dark phase, 1.258light phase, drifted at 22.58/sec). Four gratings of
orientation 08, 458, 908, and 1358with respect to horizontal were used.
Each grating was moved back and forth along an axis that was orthogonal
to the orientation of the grating. Data were acquired during between 20
and 80 presentations of each stimulus. The summed images acquired
during the presentation of one grating were subtracted from the summed
images acquired during presentation of the orthogonal grating to create
differential maps of orientation preference (difference images), (Blasdel,
1992). Difference images were 655 3480 pixels in resolution, with either
62 or 75 pixels per millimeter depending on the lens combination used.
Resulting difference images were smoothed using a 7 37 pixel mean filter
kernel. Low frequency noise was reduced by convolving the image with a
40 340 pixel mean filter kernel and subtracting the result from the
original image. Difference images were normalized by dividing the deviation
from the mean at each pixel by the average absolute deviation
across the entire image (Weliky et al., 1995). Finally, vector summation of
the difference images was done on a pixel by pixel basis to create a color
coded orientation preference map (Bonhoeffer and Grinvald, 1991,1993;
Blasdel, 1992).
Optical imaging of the geometry of the map of visual space in V1 was
accomplished using procedures similar to those developed by Campbell
and Blasdel (1995). The technique uses difference imaging for spatial
location to identify areas of cortex that respond preferentially to stimulation
of a particular line in visual space. The stimuli used consisted of
two gratings of the same orientation, each with a period of 108but
differing in the width and spatial location of the light phase of the grating
(grating 1 518light phase, 98dark phase; grating 2 538light phase, 78
dark phase). The two gratings were placed and moved in such a way that
the light phases of the gratings covered non-overlapping regions of the
stimulus monitor (grating 1 moved 618from original position, grating 2
moved 628from original position). Images acquired during presentation
of grating 2 were subtracted from images acquired during presentation of
grating 1 for each orientation to create topographic difference images.
Topographic difference images were smoothed with a 7 37 pixel mean
filter kernel for presentation.
At the conclusion of the optical imaging phase of the experiment, a
reference image of the surface blood vessels was acquired, while the cortex
was illuminated with green (540 nm) light.
Biocytin injections. Injection sites were selected by examining the difference
images and orientation preference maps to find an area of
relatively constant orientation preference. Selected sites were located
using blood vessels visible in the reference image and on the cortical
surface as seen under a surgical microscope. The orientation tuning of the
injection site was confirmed by recording multi-unit activity through the
injection micropipette. Tuning curves were obtained by averaging responses
from 5? 8 trials of 9 oriented stimuli. Iontophoretic injections
were made with glass micro pipettes with a tip diameter of ;10 mm
containing 5% biocytin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in saline using pulsed
current (7 sec on, 7 sec off) of 2.5 mamps for 10 ?15 min. After the
injection the animal was sutured, recovered from paralytic and anesthesia,
and returned to its cage.
Tissue processing. After a 16 hr recovery period, the animal was deeply
anesthetized with Nembutal (25 mg, i.p.) and transcardially perfused with
0.9% saline, followed by 10% formalin in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer.
The brain was removed and a block of cortex containing V1 was flattened
while immersed in 20% sucrose in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer and
maintained at 48C overnight. The following day 40 mm tangential sections
were cut from the block on a freezing microtome. Care was taken to
collect a first section that contained outlines of the surface vasculature, so
that the tissue sections could later be aligned with the reference image.
Our procedures for visualization of the biocytin label have been published
(Usrey and Fitzpatrick, 1996). Briefly, goat anti-biotin and biotinylated
rabbit anti-goat antibodies (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) were
used to amplify the signal before processing with the standard avidin?
biotin complex (Vectastain Kit PK-4000, Vector, Burlingame, CA) reaction,
and diaminobenzidine with nickel and cobalt intensification. Visualization
of the V1/V2 border was accomplished by using a Nissl
counterstain. Some sections were counterstained before they were coverslipped,
and some sections were counterstained after bouton distributions
were plotted.
Bouton plotting, alignment, and analysis. Blood vessel outlines in the
first tissue section, radial vessel profiles, and labeled boutons from 2? 6
sections were plotted using Neurolucida software (Microbrightfield,
Colchester, VT). In each case, enough sections were plotted to assess the
bouton distribution in the superficial layers throughout the dorsal region
of V1. The data were stored as a series of x,y coordinates for each bouton
or each blood vessel reference point in the slice. These data were aligned
with the optical imaging data using software routines written as an
extension to the public domain National Institutes of Health Image
program [original version written by Wayne Rasband at National Institutes
of Health and available from Internet by anonymous ftp from
zippy.nimh.nih.gov or on floppy disk from NTIS (5285 Port Royal Rd.,
Springfield, VA 22161, part number PB93?504868)]. The first stage of the
alignment was to align the computer drawing of the first tissue section to
the reference image acquired during optical imaging. Global scaling,
rotation, and x,y translations were applied to the stored coordinates to
achieve the best overall alignment possible, with emphasis placed on the
area of the slice containing the injection and bouton data. The second
stage of the alignment was to align deeper tissue sections, containing
labeled boutons, to an overlay of the first section drawing and reference
image by using the profiles of blood vessels that course radially through
V1. As in the first stage, only global scaling, rotation, and translations
were used to align the section. At the end of this procedure, the same
transformations used to align the blood vessel reference points in deep
sections were then applied to the bouton data (coordinates). This allowed
direct comparison of the bouton distributions with the map of orientation
preference, which was in the exact same field of view as the reference
image. Bouton distributions were not compared with the map of orientation
preference until the completion of the alignment process.
Bouton tuning curves were obtained by counting the number of boutons
that contacted sites with various orientation preferences using 108bins of
orientation preference. Bouton tuning curves were computed separately
for boutons that were greater or less than 500 mm from the injection site.
Axial specificity was assessed by counting the number of boutons within
each 108sector around the injection site, excluding the boutons that were
within 500 mm of the injection site. Profiles showing the number of
Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 2113
boutons versus distance were obtained for both preferred and orthogonal
axes (6308). Maximum distance of projection along the preferred and
orthogonal axes were determined by calculating the maximum distance
that a minimum density of 40 boutons/0.01 mm2 could be found.
Three of the cases used for determination of axial specificity were
plotted using an alternative system that did not allow the use of the
extended National Institutes of Health Image routines for alignment and
analysis. For these cases, the bouton distribution was plotted from super-
ficial sections containing layer 2/3, and the V1/V2 border was plotted in
thionin stained sections from layer 4. The border was then transferred to
the layer 2/3 plots by using the position of radial blood vessel profiles. The
number of boutons within 108sectors around the injection site was then
counted manually. Similar results were obtained by both methods, but
density, distance profiles, and maximum distance calculations were not
attempted using the manual counting method.
RESULTS
In the next sections, we describe the results from experiments
designed to examine the distribution of biocytin-labeled terminals
with respect to the map of orientation preference and the map of
visual space in striate cortex (V1) of the tree shrew. In the first
section we begin by considering the basic features of the orientation
preference map that are relevant for understanding the
quantitative assessment of modular specificity.
Maps of orientation preference in tree shrew
striate cortex
Previous studies demonstrated that neurons in the superficial
layers of tree shrew striate cortex are sharply tuned to the orientation
of edges (Humphrey et al., 1980a); moreover, on the basis
of 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) labeling, it was suggested that neurons
with similar orientation preferences were arranged in a series of
parallel bands or stripes that intersected the V1/V2 border at
right angles (Humphrey et al., 1980b). If the 2-DG experiments
have provided an accurate picture of the layout of iso-orientation
domains, then the map of orientation preference in the tree shrew
would be considerably different from what has been described in
monkeys and cats (Bonhoeffer and Grinvald, 1991, 1993; Blasdel,
1992). However, the difference could also be attributed to the fact
that the results in these other species are based on more recently
developed optical imaging techniques. These techniques provide a
more detailed assessment of the map because they permit the
comparison of the patterns of activity evoked by multiple stimulus
orientations in the same region of cortex. A complete analysis of
the map of orientation preference in the tree shrew striate cortex
based on optical imaging techniques will be presented elsewhere;
here we simply describe the basic features of the map and emphasize
that the arrangement of orientation preference maps in
the striate cortex of the tree shrew, monkey, and cat are fundamentally
similar. Orientation selectivity was also observed in V2
of some animals, although the signal strength in V2 was much
weaker for reasons that remain unknown. The functional organization
of orientation selectivity and connections in V2 are not
explored in this paper.
Our optical imaging experiments confirm some of the features
described in the 2-DG experiments. For example, in almost all of
the orientation difference images, we found regions of the cortex
that had the appearance of parallel alternating dark and light
stripes (Fig. 1A). These stripes were common in the most caudal
part of the exposed surface and along the V1/V2 border where
they intersected the border at right angles. However, other parts
of the map were decidedly less stripe-like in appearance; in the
center of the exposed surface, for example, the stripes were often
replaced by a less regular and more punctate set of domains.
Furthermore, a comparison of the patterns of activity evoked by
different stimulus orientations revealed that even those regions of
the map that had a stripe-like appearance in images generated for
one stimulus orientation would often appear to break up into
discontinuous patches in images generated for other stimulus
orientations. Taken together, these observations suggested that
the map of orientation preference in the tree shrew is far more
complex than was indicated by the earlier 2-DG experiments.
The fine-scale mapping of orientation preference is best appreciated
by combining the individual difference images using vector
summation to create an orientation preference map where colors
are used to represent the preferred orientation at each site (Fig.
1B). This analysis confirms that the map of orientation preference
in the tree shrew has the same basic organizational features that
have been described previously in monkey and cat striate cortex
(Bonhoeffer and Grinvald, 1991, 1993; Blasdel, 1992). In many
regions of the map, commonly referred to as pinwheels, a continuous
shift in orientation preference is obtained by sampling
around a point, or singularity. Examples of two pinwheels from
the orientation preference map shown in Figure 1B are shown at
higher magnification in Figure 1C. Linear zones, regions of the
map in which a progressive change in orientation preference is
obtained by sampling along a straight line (Blasdel, 1992; Obermayer
and Blasdel, 1993), are also a prominent feature of orientation
preference maps in the tree shrew. As predicted from the
difference images, linear zones are common along the V1/V2
border and along the caudal edge of the dorsal portion of V1.
They can extend for 2?3 mm, a distance that covers several full
repeats of the orientation cycle. In Figure 1, A and B, an especially
large linear zone is visible in the caudal portion of the map, and
this same linear zone has been enlarged in the left hand side of
Figure 1C.
Modular specificity of horizontal connections
To assess the modular specificity of horizontal connections, combined
optical imaging and biocytin injection experiments were
accomplished in seven animals. After the optical imaging phase of
the experiment, an injection site was selected and the orientation
tuning of the injection site was confirmed by recording multi-unit
activity through the injection pipette. Our biocytin injections
resulted in the labeling of a small number of cell bodies (12? 65)
that were confined to sites that were typically less than 200 mm in
diameter (average diameter 176 mm, largest diameter 320 mm; see
Fig. 2A,B). In two of our cases, one or two retrogradely labeled
cells could be found at some distance from the injection site, but
this did not hamper our ability to detect the underlying specificity
of the connections. The axonal processes of the labeled neurons
were well labeled (Fig. 2C) and exhibited the characteristic bouton
terminal swellings that have been described in other species
(Gilbert and Wiesel, 1983; Amir et al., 1993; Kisvarday and Eysel,
1992). As seen in Figure 2A, labeled axons extended away from
the injection site for several millimeters and gave rise to prominent
patches. Borders of bouton patches were determined subjectively
and by thresholding a density plot of the bouton distributions.
The two methods were in good agreement and the average
size of bouton patches was determined to be ;400 mm 3250 mm.
This information is provided for comparison with other reports
only; the borders of bouton patches were not used in the analysis
of modular or axial specificity. The distribution of labeled boutons
was plotted from between two and six sections for each case.
The interpretation of our findings rests on the accuracy with
which we are able to align plots of labeled boutons from the
anatomical sections with optical maps of orientation preference.
2114 J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex
Figure 1. Optical imaging of intrinsic signals in tree shrew visual cortex. A, Difference images obtained for four stimulus angles (08, 458, 908, 1358, shown in inset
of each panel) from one animal. Black areas of each panel indicate areas of cortex that were preferentially activated by a given stimulus, and light gray areas
indicate areas that were active during presentation of the orthogonal angle. The dashed line in the 908panel indicates the approximate location of the V1/V2
border. B, Orientation preference map obtained by vector summation of data obtained for each angle. Orientation preference of each location is color-coded
according to the key shown below. C, Common features of the orientation preference maps. Portions of the orientation preference map shown in B have been
enlarged to demonstrate that the orientation preference maps contained both linear zones (left) and pinwheel arrangements (right).
Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 2115
For this reason, the steps in the alignment process are illustrated
in Figure 3. This first stage of the alignment process was to align
a drawing of the blood vessels found in the first section (shown in
yellow in Fig. 3A) to the reference image taken during the optical
imaging session ( grayscale image in the background of Fig. 3A).
The second stage consisted of aligning deeper sections (shown in
blue in Fig. 3A), that contained labeled boutons, to the first
section using profiles of blood vessels that course radially through
the depth of the cortex. Only global scaling, translation and
rotation operations were used during both stages of the alignment
(no regional alignments were made and no morphing of the data
were used). Emphasis was placed on getting the best alignment for
the area of the sections that contained the injection site and
labeled boutons. The inset of Figure 3A demonstrates the degree
of accuracy we were able to achieve in this process. Based on
overlays such as those in Figure 3 we estimate errors in alignment
of up to 50 ?100 mm at specific locations far removed from the
injection sites, but no systematic errors throughout the section.
After the alignment procedure, difference images or orientation
preference maps were substituted for the reference image, and
the actual bouton distribution was substituted for the blood vessel
pattern.
Figure 3B shows the results of the alignment process presented
in Figure 3A. The injection in this case was made into a site that
responded preferentially to edges with an orientation near vertical.
The tuning curve based on multi-unit activity showed a peak
at 808and a half width at half height of 198. The distribution of
labeled boutons that resulted from the injection is shown superimposed
on a difference image in which black regions represent
areas that were strongly activated by a vertical stimulus (908) and
white regions represent areas that were strongly activated by a
horizontal stimulus (08). Except for the region immediately adjacent
to the injection site, there is a striking correspondence
between the distribution of labeled terminals and the regions of
the orientation map that respond strongly to vertical edges.
A better appreciation of the range of orientation preferences of
the sites contacted by a given set of horizontal connections can be
gained by examining the bouton distributions displayed over a
color-coded orientation preference map. Figure 4A illustrates this
comparison for the same case that is depicted in Figure 3 (preferred
orientation of the injection site 5808); Figure 4B illustrates
a case in which an injection was made into a site with a
preferred orientation near horizontal (peak of tuning curve 1608,
half-width at half-height 28.58). In each case, beyond the area
immediately adjacent to the injection site, the labeled boutons are
clustered in regions that have orientation preferences similar to
that of the injection site.
To quantify the relationship between the bouton distributions
and the orientation preference maps, we generated ?bouton tuning
curves? that show the number of labeled boutons that overlie
a particular range of orientation values in the orientation preference
map. In each case examined, the bouton tuning curves for
boutons found at distances greater than 500 mm from the injection
site showed a clear peak at or near the preferred orientation of
the injection site (Fig. 5). In general, the tuning curves for boutons
found at distances less than 500 mm from the injection site were
considerably broader (Fig. 5A,B) but, in some cases, specificity
for sites that were at or near the preferred orientation was still
present (Fig. 5C).
Modular specificity of long-distance horizontal connections
Figure 2. Biocytin injections made into superficial layers of V1. A, Low-power image showing an injection site, labeled axons leaving the site, and several
patches formed by axon arbors. Radial vessel profiles used in aligning tissue sections are also visible. Scale bar, 100 mm. B, The same injection site seen
in A shown at higher power. Individual cells that have taken up the biocytin can be identified. Scale bar, 25 mm. C, A patch of biocytin label shown at
higher magnification. Labeled boutons are visible on the axons. Scale bar, 25 mm.
2116 J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex
Figure 3. Alignment of bouton distributions to optical imaging data (case 9509). A, The image in the background is a reference image taken during the
optical imaging phase of the experiment. The yellow overlay is a computer-assisted drawing of blood vessel outlines and radial vessel profiles seen in the
first tissue section. The drawing has been scaled, rotated, and translated to align with the reference image. The blue overlay is a computer-assisted drawing
of radial vessel profiles and the section outline from a deeper section that contained labeled boutons. This section has been independently scaled, rotated,
and translated to align with the reference image and the first tissue section. The precision of both stages of the alignment can be seen in the inset. B, Same
animal and field of view as seen in A. The reference image has been replaced with a difference image showing areas active for a 908stimulus in black.
Bouton distribution information has been added using the same transforms used to align the blue section in A. The green symbols indicate cells that took up
and transported the biocytin. Red symbols indicate locations of labeled boutons. Scale bar, 400 mm for inset in A.
Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 2117
(greater than 500 mm from the injection site) is summarized for
four cases in Figure 6. For each case, the orientation tuning curve
based on multi-unit activity at the injection site is shown in Figure
6A, and the bouton tuning curve is shown in Figure 6B, plotted in
the same color. In each case, there is a striking correspondence
between the peak in the injection site tuning curve and the peak
in the bouton tuning curves. This relationship is even more apparent
when the bouton tuning curves are expressed in terms of
the difference between the orientation preference of the sites
contacted by labeled boutons and the peak of the orientation
tuning curve for multi-unit activity at the injection site. This is
done for all seven of our cases in Figure 6C, where the gray lines
represent individual cases and the black line represents the median
for the group. Each of the bouton tuning curves is centered
on or near the preferred orientation of the injection site. By
summing the percentage of boutons found in the seven center bins
of the median curve, we determined that 57.6% of the boutons
contact sites with an orientation preference within 6358of the
preferred orientation of the injection site. For individual cases,
between 48.2 and 72.6% of the boutons met this restriction. This
percentage of boutons is significantly different from the percentage
expected for an even distribution that would contain ;5.56%
of the boutons in each of the 18 bins (dashed line in Fig. 6C),
resulting in 38.9% of the boutons found within 6358( p ,0.02,
Wilcoxon signed rank test).
Axial specificity of horizontal connections
Before describing our analysis of axial specificity of horizontal
connections it is necessary to describe the organization of the map
of visual space in tree shrew V1. As illustrated in Figure 7A, the
tree shrew has a well developed striate cortex with a prominent
V1/V2 border that is clearly discerned in Nissl-stained sections.
An earlier physiological study by Kaas et al. (1972) demonstrated
that, as in other species, the V1/V2 border corresponds to the
representation of the vertical meridian in visual space. The horizontal
meridian, as well as other iso-elevation lines, intersects this
border at approximately right angles (Kaas, 1980).
To confirm the geometry of the map of visual space, we used
optical imaging with a stimulation paradigm similar to one developed
by Campbell and Blasdel (1995). The technique uses difference
imaging for spatial location with two gratings of the same
orientation to identify areas of cortex that respond preferentially
to stimulation of a particular line in visual space (see Methods for
details). Data obtained from one animal using this technique to
Figure 4. Bouton distributions shown over orientation preference maps for two cases. A, Bouton distribution after an injection into a site with a preferred
orientation of 808, determined by recording through the same tip used to make the injection (same case as in Fig. 3). The white symbols indicate the
location of cells that took up the biocytin. Labeled boutons (black symbols) are found at sites with all orientation preferences near the injection site, but
preferentially at sites with the same orientation preference as the injection site at longer distances. B, Results from an experiment in which an injection
was made into a site with an orientation preference of 1608(case 9517). Color key and scale bar apply to both figures.
2118 J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex
visualize 08, 458, 908, and 1358lines in the map of visual space are
shown in Figure 8B. Similar results were obtained in two other
animals. Results from these experiments were in general agreement
with earlier mapping studies (Kaas et al., 1972; Kaas, 1980).
The map of visual space presented in Figure 7C has been slightly
modified from one originally presented by Kaas (1980) to reflect
the geometry and spacing of iso-azimuth and iso-elevation lines as
measured by optical imaging.
Figure 7, B and C, confirms that the map of visual space is
largely isotropic near the center of V1, and all of our injections
were placed in this area. In addition, they illustrate that it is
possible to specify the axis in cortex that corresponds to a particFigure
5. Quantitative analysis of modular specificity of bouton distributions.
The number of boutons that overlie a particular 108range of
orientation preference is shown separately for boutons that are found
,500 mm from the injection site ( gray curves) and those found at .500
mm distance (black curves). In each case, for the boutons found at .500
mm, a peak is seen at or near the preferred orientation of the injection site.
Figure 6. Correspondence between orientation tuning of injection sites
and specificity of bouton distributions for four cases. A, Orientation tuning
curves determined from recordings of multiunit activity that were made
through the biocytin-filled pipettes at each injection site. Normalized
responses are plotted versus stimulus orientation. B, Bouton tuning curves
for the same cases shown in A, plotted in the same color as A. For each
case, the percentage of the total number of boutons that overlie sites with
a given orientation preference is plotted. Only boutons found at distances
.500 mm from the injection site were used in this analysis. Each
curve has a peak at or near the peak of the physiologically determined
tuning curve shown in A. C, Data from all seven of our combined imaging
and biocytin injection experiments. The bouton tuning curves for each
case are expressed as the percentage of the boutons that contact sites that
differ in orientation preference from the injection site by a specified
amount. Individual cases are shown in gray, and the median is shown in
black. The dashed line shown at 5.56% reflects the percentage of boutons
expected in each of the 18 bins if the boutons were distributed evenly over
the map of orientation preference.
Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 2119
ular axis in the visual field by simply rotating the appropriate
number of degrees from the V1/V2 border axis. For example,
Figure 7C depicts a 458axis (black lines) and 1358axis ( gray lines)
as they would appear in both the right visual field and the left
visual cortex. Thus, the presence of a prominent V1/V2 border
and the lack of large distortions in the map of visual space greatly
facilitate the examination of axial specificity of horizontal connections
in the tree shrew.
As described in other species, injections of biocytin into layer
2/3 resulted in a distribution of labeled terminals that was elongated
across the cortical surface. The axis of elongation was found
to vary from case to case and was systematically related to the
orientation preference of the injection site. This basic relationship
can be appreciated by examining the distribution of labeled terminals
compared to an outline of V1 as is done for four cases in
Figure 8. In each panel, the axis of elongation of the labeled
terminals can be compared to the V1/V2 border (vertical meridian).
As illustrated in Figure 8A, an injection into a site with a
preferred orientation near vertical resulted in a distribution of
labeled terminals that was elongated parallel to the V1/V2 border.
In contrast, an injection into a site with a preferred orientation
of near horizontal (Fig. 8C) resulted in a distribution that was
elongated perpendicular to the V1/V2 border. In each of the cases
that we examined, we found a similar relationship: layer 2/3
neurons give rise to horizontal connections that extend for longer
distances, and give rise to more boutons, along an axis of the
visual field map that corresponds to their preferred stimulus
orientation.
Quantification of the systematic relationship between the axis
of elongation of the terminal distributions and the preferred
stimulus orientation of the biocytin injection sites is illustrated in
Figures 9 ?11. The polar plots in Figure 9 illustrate the number of
labeled terminals found in successive 108sectors surrounding an
injection site for the same four cases shown in Figure 8. In these
plots, the distance of each point from the center of the circle
indicates the relative number of boutons found in that 108sector.
The 08sector for each polar plot was assigned by drawing a line
through the center of the injection site orthogonal to the V1/V2
border. Sectors were then assigned in a clockwise manner, resulting
in the 908sector corresponding to an axis that is parallel to the
V1/V2 border. With this reference scheme, the distribution of
labeled terminals across the visual field map can be compared
directly to the preferred stimulus orientation recorded from the
units at the injection site (shown to the upper right of each plot).
In each case, the dominant axis of the terminal polar plot matches
the preferred stimulus orientation recorded from the site before
the injection.
Our sample of injection sites from 13 cases included a wide
range of preferred stimulus orientations, and for each orientation
we found a corresponding bias in the axial distribution of labeled
terminals. Figure 10A shows the terminal polar plots for all 13 of
our cases and illustrates that each injection resulted in a distribution
with a distinct axial bias. The degree to which the variation
among cases in the axial alignment of terminal distributions is a
function of the preferred stimulus orientation of the injection site
is illustrated in Figure 10B. In this figure, the terminal polar plots
have been aligned by rotating them by an angle that corresponds
to the difference between the preferred stimulus orientation of the
injection site and horizontal (08). For example, the bouton distribution
for a site with a preferred stimulus orientation of 228was
rotated clockwise by 228. Individual profiles are illustrated by the
gray curves and the black curve represents the median for all of
Figure 7. The map of visual space in tree shrew V1. A, Photomicrograph
of a Nissl-stained section of visual cortex. V1 stands out clearly as the
darkly stained region of the section. B, Topographic difference images for
four stimulus angles. The dark bands and light bands ;0.5?1.0 mm wide in
each image reflect areas of cortex that were differentially activated by the
two grating patterns for that stimulus angle (see Materials and Methods
for details). The distance between a pair of dark or light bands corresponds
to 108in the map of visual space. The 08and 908images represent
iso-elevation and iso-azimuth lines. C, Diagram of the right visual field and
left visual cortex of the tree shrew, modified from a figure by Kaas (1980).
Lines at 458orientation (black line) and at 1358orientation ( gray line) are
shown as they would appear in the visual field and in the cortex.
2120 J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex
the cases examined. On average, neurons in layer 2/3 give rise to
four times as many terminals along an axis that corresponds to
their preferred stimulus orientation (6358) than along the orthogonal
axis (6358).
The axial bias in the distribution of connections is reflected not
only in the number of labeled terminals, but in the distance of the
labeled terminals from the injection site. Labeled boutons were
consistently found to extend greater distances from the injection
site along the axis of the visual field map that corresponds to their
preferred stimulus orientation. This feature of the bouton distributions
is illustrated for two cases in Figure 11, A and B, that plot
the number of boutons versus distance along either the preferred
or orthogonal axes. To further quantify this relationship we determined
the maximum distance along the preferred and orthogonal
axes (6308) at which a minimum density of 40 boutons/0.01
mm2 was exceeded for each case. For the case shown in Figure
11A, the maximum extension along the preferred axis was 3.73
mm and the maximum extension along the orthogonal axis was
0.96 mm. This information is shown for all 10 cases for which the
required data were available in Figure 11C. The maximum distance
at which boutons were found along the preferred axis
(median 1.77 mm) was significantly different from the maximum
distance along the orthogonal axis (median 1.16 mm; p ,0.004,
Wilcoxon signed rank test).
DISCUSSION
The results of this study confirm the results of previous studies in
cats and monkeys showing that long-range horizontal connections
selectively link patches of neurons that have similar orientation
preferences (Gilbert and Wiesel, 1989; Blasdel et al., 1992; Malach
et al., 1993). In addition, our results reveal a new feature of
long-range horizontal connections that has not been described
before: orientation-specific anisotropy. Horizontal connections in
the tree shrew extend for greater distances and distribute more
terminal boutons along an axis of the visual field map that corresponds
to the preferred orientation of the injection site. In the
next sections we relate these results to those of previous studies
and consider the implications of modular and axial specificity for
understanding the function of horizontal connections.
Modular specificity of local and long-distance
horizontal connections
Our results demonstrate that long-distance horizontal connections
in V1 have a strong bias toward connecting regions with
Figure 8. Bouton distributions from four cases. The preferred orientation for each case is shown in the top right of each panel. The axis in cortex
corresponding to the preferred orientation is indicated by the gray rectangle underlying each distribution. Each point indicates an individual bouton. Note
the dense distribution of boutons found near the injection site and more patchy distribution found at longer distances. In each case, the distribution is
elongated along an axis that corresponds to the preferred orientation of the injection site.
Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 2121
Figure 9. Quantification of bouton distributions for four cases. For each case, the number of boutons found in successive 108sectors around the injection
is quantified. Distance from the origin indicates the number of boutons found in a given sector normalized to the maximum number of boutons found
in any sector for that case. The 08sector was assigned by drawing a line through the injection site that was orthogonal to the V1/V2 border, and the
remaining sectors were assigned in clockwise manner. Only boutons outside of 500 mm were used in this analysis. The preferred orientation of the injection
site for each case is indicated by the black bar in each inset. The thin gray line in the visual field diagrams and the gray dashed lines in the polar plots
correspond to the vertical meridian.
2122 J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex
similar orientation preferences, and a degree of specificity that is
commensurate with the orientation tuning of the neurons they
interconnect. In several cases, for example, bouton tuning curves,
constructed from an analysis of the position of boutons relative to
the orientation map, were remarkably similar in both their peak
and half-width to the physiologically defined orientation tuning
curves for multi-unit activity at the injection site (compare tuning
curves in Fig. 6A, B). In addition, the peak of the median bouton
tuning curve constructed from all of the cases was centered on the
preferred orientation of the injection site and 57.6% of the labeled
boutons contacted sites with a preferred orientation that
was within 358of the peak. This degree of specificity is comparable
to that reported for long-range horizontal connections in macaque
V1 (Malach et al., 1993).
Although, for technical reasons, it proved more difficult to
characterize the orientation specificity of boutons located within
500 mm of the injection site, on the whole, these local connections
appear less specific than their long-distance counterparts. In many
cases, for example, a nearly uniform halo of labeled terminals
surrounded the biocytin injection site and the tuning curves for
the local bouton distribution were correspondingly flat. Because
we did not plot boutons inside the area of the injection site that
contained labeled cell bodies and dendrites, it is likely that we
have underestimated the degree of iso-orientation connectivity of
local connections. Nevertheless, unlike long-range connections,
labeled terminals near the injection site are located in regions of
the orientation preference map that include the full range of
values. Observations from macaque visual cortex also suggest a
lower specificity for local horizontal connections (Amir et al.,
1993; Malach et al., 1993).
The difference in specificity of local and long-distance connections
could reflect a difference in the relative contribution of
Figure 10. Correspondence between preferred
orientation of injection sites and the
axial specificity of the bouton distributions. A,
Polar plots are shown for all 13 cases examined
for axial specificity. Each polar plot was
constructed as described in Figure 9 and is
color-coded according to the orientation preference
of the injection site for that case. The
black curve is the median of the 13 cases. B,
Data from all 13 cases were combined by
rotating each curve by a number of degrees
equal to the orientation preference at the
injection site for that case. Gray lines indicate
individual cases, and the black line indicates
the normalized median of all 13 cases.
Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 2123
excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Previous studies have shown
that, compared to excitatory connections, inhibitory connections
in layer 2/3 extend for shorter distances (Albus et al., 1991;
Matsubara and Boyd, 1992; Albus and Wahle, 1994), are less
specific for orientation domains (Kisvarday and Eysel, 1993; Kisvarday
et al., 1994;), and tend to be more uniformly distributed
around the injection site (Albus et al., 1991; Matsubara and Boyd,
1992; Albus and Wahle, 1994). Thus, it is possible that the distribution
of boutons that we observe results from a nonspecific ring
of connections contributed by GABAergic neurons that is superimposed
upon the more specific connections established by pyramidal
neurons. Clearly, determining the actual contribution of
these two classes of neurons to the pattern of local connections
will require an analysis at the single cell level.
Axial specificity of horizontal connections
This is the first demonstration of an anisotropy in horizontal
connections which varies from site to site and is systematically
related to the orientation selective responses of cortical neurons.
Previous studies in visual cortex of cats and macaque monkeys
have noted that horizontal connections tend to form distributions
that are elongated along a particular axis, and in some cases the
observed anisotropy in horizontal connections was explained in
terms of a corresponding anisotropy in the map of visual space
(McGuire et al., 1991; Yoshioka et al., 1992; Amir et al., 1993;
Malach et al., 1993; Grinvald et al., 1994). These authors reported
that horizontal connections appear to consistently extend for
longer distances along the vertical axis of the map of visual space,
corresponding to the fact that cortical magnification factor
(amount of cortical surface area per unit visual space) is greatest
along this axis. However, other investigators have reported elongated
distributions which could not be explained by the anisotropy
in the map of visual space (Gilbert and Wiesel, 1983, 1989;
Kisvarday and Eysel, 1992). Thus, the exact extent to which
anisotropies in the map of visual space, or other factors, determine
the distribution of horizontal connections has remained
unclear.
A global feature like magnification factor cannot explain the
consistent relationship between orientation preference and axis of
elongation in the tree shrew. Nevertheless, it might account for
some of the variability that we observed in the absolute amount of
elongation along the preferred axis. For example, some of the
most elongated distributions in the tree shrew had axes that ran
parallel to the V1/V2 border, whereas some of the least elongated
ran perpendicular to the border. We did not observe a consistent
relation between map anisotropy and degree of elongation, but
this relationship might have been obscured by other factors such
as the size and placement of the injection site, or variations in the
quality of biocytin uptake and transport.
An axial alignment of horizontal connections related to orientation
preference was first suggested by Mitchison and Crick
(1982) as an explanation for the observation that injections of
tracers in V1 produce patchy labeling, even when the injection is
large enough to involve sites with a wide range of orientation
preferences. Using computer simulations, they showed that if the
network of horizontal connections was constrained by just one
rule of ?like connects to like? then a continuous distribution of
label would result from a large injection. On the other hand, if two
rules requiring axial and modular specificity of horizontal connections
were used to model horizontal connectivity, then a patchy
distribution of label would result from a large injection. The
Figure 11. Quantification of elongation of bouton distributions. A, Number
of boutons versus distance in 100 mm bins along both the preferred (black
curve) and orthogonal ( gray curve) axes (6308). Preferred orientation for this
case was 408. B, Same information shown for a case that had a preferred
orientation of 1608. C, Scatterplot showing the maximum distance at which
boutons were found to exceed a minimum density of 40 boutons/0.01 mm2
along the preferred and orthogonal axes (6308) for 10 cases. Dashed lines
indicate equal distance along preferred and orthogonal axes.
2124 J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex
demonstration of combined modular and axial specificity in the
tree shrew, and the observation of patchy distributions of labeled
neurons after large tracer injections in V1 of many species, suggests
that modular specificity alone might be insufficient to explain
the distribution of horizontal connections. Indeed, preliminary
results, using combined optical imaging and biocytin injections,
suggest that a combined modular and axial specificity might be
present in the squirrel monkey (Sincich and Blasdel, 1995). It is
possible that a relationship between preferred orientation and axis
of projection also exists in cats and other primates but is difficult
to demonstrate due to other factors such as large anisotropies in
the map of visual space.
Functional implications
Combined with the evidence that horizontal connections are
largely reciprocal (Kisvarday and Eysel, 1992), these results indicate
that individual neurons in layer 2/3 receive input from other
neurons whose receptive fields are co-oriented (of similar orientation
preference) and co-axial (displaced along an axis in visual
space that corresponds to their preferred orientation; Fig.
12A,B). This relationship raises the possibility that horizontal
connections might contribute to the orientation selectivity of layer
2/3 neurons. For example, a neuron that responds best to a
vertical stimulus might do so, at least in part, because it receives
input from a network of other layer 2/3 neurons whose receptive
fields are aligned along the vertical axis of visual space. This
arrangement could be viewed as the intracortical equivalent of the
Hubel and Wiesel model in which layer 4 neurons derive their
orientation selectivity by sampling from a population of lateral
geniculate nucleus neurons whose receptive fields are aligned
along an axis in visual space (Hubel and Wiesel, 1962). Presumably,
the intrinsic circuitry in layer 2/3 acts in concert with orientation
selective inputs derived from layer 4 to generate the orientation
selectivity of layer 2/3 neurons. Indeed, the contribution of
axially aligned horizontal connections could explain why layer 2/3
neurons in the tree shrew and ferret are more tightly tuned for
orientation than those in layer 4 (Humphrey et al., 1980a; Chapman
and Stryker, 1993). It could also explain why many neurons
exhibit sharper orientation tuning (a smaller half width at half
height) when longer stimuli are used to determine tuning (Henry
et al., 1974).
Because of their extensive spread, horizontal connections
have been implicated as one of the potential substrates for
receptive field surround effects? changes in the response pattern
of neurons produced by visual stimulation of the region
that lies outside of the receptive field as defined by a small,
simple stimulus (for review, see Gilbert, 1992). In the tree
shrew, for example, these connections extend for up to 4 mm
from the injection site?a distance that corresponds to ;208of
visual space?whereas the classically defined receptive field at
this eccentricity extends for less than 58. The results of the
present study suggest that horizontal connections could be the
source of a particular class of receptive field surround effects
that exhibit axial specificity, exerting a greater influence in
regions of visual space that lie along the axis of the neuron?s
preferred orientation (i.e., end-zones) than along the orthogonal
axis (side-zones). Effects of this type have been described
in both cat and monkey striate cortex and in several cases the
effects are primarily facilitatory (Nelson and Frost, 1985; Fiorani
et al., 1992; Kapadia, 1995). Some neurons in macaque
Figure 12. Summary of specificity of horizontal connections in V1. A, Example of axon arborizations from two cells shown over a combined map of visual
space and difference map of orientation preference. The dark regions of the difference map indicate regions that prefer 908, and the lighter areas indicate
areas that prefer 08. A neuron found in a dark region of the map projects to other areas of the map with the same orientation preference and that lie
along a line corresponding to a vertical line in the map of visual space. A neuron found in a light region of the map (orientation preference 08) projects
to other parts of the cortex that prefer 08and that lie along a horizontal line in the map of visual space. B, Input to layer 2/3 cells via horizontal connections.
Because horizontal connections are largely reciprocal, cells in layer 2/3 will receive input from other layer 2/3 cells with the same orientation preference,
the receptive fields of which are displaced along a line in visual space. The solid rectangles indicate the receptive fields of the two cells shown in A. The
open rectangles indicate the receptive fields of cells that would provide input to these two cells via horizontal connections. Nearby cells with overlapping
receptive fields are omitted for clarity.
Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 2125
visual cortex, for example, show an enhanced response to
placement of an additional stimulus outside the receptive field
(Kapadia et al., 1995); this enhancement occurs only when the
additional element is at the preferred orientation and collinear
with the stimulus placed in the receptive field. Neurons in layer
2/3 of tree shrew striate cortex also exhibit long range axially
specific facilitatory effects. For example, many layer 2/3 neurons
in the tree shrew exhibit length summation, showing an
increase in response with increasing stimulus length for stimuli
as long as 408. In addition, stimulation of the end-zones alone,
without stimulation of the classical receptive field, is sufficient
to drive some layer 2/3 neurons, whereas stimulation of the
side-zones is ineffective (Bosking and Fitzpatrick, 1995).
Long-range collinear facilitatory effects could serve as one of
the important mechanisms that underlies the perception of
continuity in visual patterns. Indeed, the perception of continuity
appears to depend critically on the very features that
characterize long-range horizontal connections. For example,
the ability of human observers to detect contours composed of
small oriented line segments from among an array of distracter
elements is dependent upon both the orientation and position
of the elements (Field et al., 1993). Observers are much better
at detecting a contour composed of multiple segments when the
segments are aligned with the path of the contour than when
they are aligned orthogonal to the path. Similarly, detection of
an oriented line segment or a grating is enhanced by flanking
the stimulus with other collinear stimuli (Polat and Sagi, 1993;
Kapadia et al., 1995).
Thus, the modular and axial specificity of horizontal connections
seems well suited for supporting the perception of contours,
especially under noisy or degraded stimulus conditions.
REFERENCES
Albus K, Wahle P (1994) The topography of tangential inhibitory connections
in the postnatally developing and mature striate cortex of the
cat. Eur J Neurosci 6:779 ?792.
Albus K, Wahle P, Lubke J, Matute C (1991) The contribution of
GABA-ergic neurons to horizontal intrinsic connections in upper layers
of the cat?s striate cortex. Exp Brain Res 85:235?239.
Amir Y, Harel M, Malach R (1993) Cortical hierarchy reflected in the
organization of intrinsic connections in macaque monkey visual cortex.
J Comp Neurol 334:19 ? 46.
Blasdel GG (1992) Orientation selectivity, preference, and continuity in
monkey striate cortex. J Neurosci 12:3139 ?3161.
Blasdel GG, Yoshioka T, Levitt JB, Lund JS (1992) Correlation between
patterns of lateral connectivity and patterns of orientation preference in
monkey striate cortex. Soc Neurosci Abstr 18:389.
Bolz J, Gilbert CD (1989) The role of horizontal connections in generating
long receptive fields in the cat visual cortex. Eur J Neurosci
1:263?268.
Bonhoeffer T, Grinvald A (1991) Iso-orientation domains in cat visual
cortex are arranged in pinwheel-like patterns. Nature 353:429 ? 431.
Bonhoeffer T, Grinvald A (1993) The layout of iso-orientation domains
in area 18 of cat visual cortex: optical imaging reveals a pinwheel-like
organization. J Neurosci 13:4157? 4180.
Bosking WH, Fitzpatrick D (1995) Physiological correlates of anisotropy
in horizontal connections: length summation properties of
neurons in layers 2 and 3 of tree shrew striate cortex. Soc Neurosci
Abstr 21:1751.
Campbell D, Blasdel GG (1995) Optical measurement of cortical magnification
factors in new and old world primates. Soc Neurosci Abstr
21:771.
Chapman B, Stryker MP (1993) Development of orientation selectivity in
ferret visual cortex and effects of deprivation. J Neurosci 13:5251?5262.
Field DJ, Hayes A, Hess RF (1993) Contour integration by the human
visual system: evidence for a local ?association field.? Vision Res
33:173?193.
Fiorani M, Rosa MGP, Gattass R, Rocha-Miranda CE (1992) Dynamic
surrounds of receptive fields in primate striate cortex: a physiological
basis for perceptual completion? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
89:8547? 8551.
Gilbert CD (1992) Horizontal integration and cortical dynamics. Neuron
9:1?13.
Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1979) Morphology and intracortical projections
of functionally characterised neurones in the cat visual cortex. Nature
280:120 ?125.
Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1983) Clustered intrinsic connections in cat
visual cortex. J Neurosci 3:1116 ?1133.
Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1989) Columnar specificity of intrinsic horizontal
and corticocortical connections in cat visual cortex. J Neurosci
9:2432?2442.
Grinvald A, Lieke EE, Frostig RD, Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1986) Functional
architecture of cortex revealed by optical imaging of intrinsic
signals. Nature 324:361?364.
Grinvald A, Lieke EE, Frostig RD, Hildesheim R (1994) Cortical pointspread
function and long-range lateral interactions revealed by realtime
optical imaging of Macaque monkey primary visual cortex. J Neurosci
14:2545?2568.
Henry GH, Dreher B, Bishop PO (1974) Orientation specificity of cells in
cat striate cortex. J Neurophysiol 37:1394 ?1409.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN (1962) Receptive fields, binocular interaction and
functional architecture in the cat?s visual cortex. J Physiol (Lond)
160:106 ?154.
Humphrey AL, Skeen LC, Norton TT (1980a) Topographic organization
of the orientation column system in the striate cortex of the tree
shrew (Tupaia glis). I. Microelectrode recording. J Comp Neurol
192:531?543.
Humphrey AL, Skeen LC, Norton TT (1980b) Topographic organization
of the orientation column system in the striate cortex of the tree
shrew (Tupaia glis). II. Deoxyglucose mapping. J Comp Neurol
192:544 ?566.
Kaas JH (1980) A comparative survey of visual cortex organization in
mammals. In: Comparative neurology of the telencephalon (Ebbesson
SOE, ed), pp 483?502. New York: Plenum.
Kaas JH, Hall WC, Killackey H, Diamond IT (1972) Visual cortex of the
tree shrew (Tupaia glis): architectonic subdivisions and representations
of the visual field. Brain Res 42:491? 496.
Kapadia MK, Ito M, Gilbert CD, Westheimer G (1995) Improvement in
visual sensitivity by changes in local context: parallel studies in human
observers and in V1 of alert monkeys. Neuron 15:843? 856.
Kisvarday ZF, Eysel UT (1992) Cellular organization of reciprocal
patchy networks in layer III of cat visual cortex (area 17). Neuroscience
46:275?286.
Kisvarday ZF, Eysel UT (1993) Functional and structural topography of
horizontal inhibitory connections in cat visual cortex. Eur J Neurosci
5:1558 ?1572.
Kisvarday ZF, Kim DS, Eysel UT, Bonhoeffer T (1994) Relationship
between lateral inhibitory connections and the topography of the orientation
map in cat visual cortex. Eur J Neurosci 6:1619 ?1632.
Livingstone MS, Hubel DH (1984) Specificity of intrinsic connections in
primate primary visual cortex. J Neurosci 4:2830 ?2835.
Malach R, Amir Y, Harel M, Grinvald A (1993) Relationship between
intrinsic connections and functional architecture revealed by optical
imaging and in vivo targeted biocytin injections in primate striate cortex.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:10469 ?10473.
Matsubara JA, Boyd JD (1992) Presence of GABA-immunoreactive
neurons within intracortical patches in area 18 of the cat. Brain Res
583:161?170.
Matsubara JA, Cynader MS, Swindale NV, Stryker MP (1985) Intrinsic
projections within visual cortex: evidence for orientation specific local
connections. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 82:935?939.
Matsubara JA, Cynader MS, Swindale NV (1987) Anatomical properties
and physiological correlates of the intrinsic connections in cat area 18.
J Neurosci 7:1428 ?1446.
McGuire BA, Gilbert CD, Rivlin PK, Wiesel TN (1991) Targets of horizontal
connections in macaque primary visual cortex. J Comp Neurol
305:370 ?392.
Mitchison G, Crick F (1982) Long axons within the striate cortex: their
distribution, orientation, and patterns of connection. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 79:3661?3665.
Nelson JI, Frost BJ (1985) Intracortical facilitation among co-oriented,
2126 J. Neurosci., March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127 Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex
co-axially aligned simple cells in cat striate cortex. Exp Brain Res
61:54 ? 61.
Obermayer K, Blasdel GG (1993) Geometry of orientation and ocular
dominance columns in monkey striate cortex. J Neurosci 13:4114 ? 4129.
Polat U, Sagi D (1993) Lateral interactions between spatial channels:
suppression and facilitation revealed by lateral masking experiments.
Vision Res 33:993?999.
Rockland KS, Lund JS (1982) Widespread periodic intrinsic connections
in the tree shrew visual cortex. Science 215:1532?1534.
Sincich L, Blasdel GG (1995) Lateral connections and orientation preference
in layers II/ III of squirrel monkey striate cortex. Soc Neurosci
Abstr 21:393.
T?so DY, Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1986) Relationships between horizontal
interactions and functional architecture in cat striate cortex as
revealed by cross-correlation analysis. J Neurosci 6:1160 ?1170.
Usrey WM, Fitzpatrick D (1996) Specificity in the axonal connections of
layer VI neurons in tree shrew striate cortex: evidence for distinct
granular and supragranular systems. J Neurosci 16:1203?1218.
Weliky M, Kandler K, Fitzpatrick D, Katz LC (1995) Patterns of excitation
and inhibition evoked by horizontal connections in visual cortex
share a common relationship to orientation columns. Neuron
15:541?552.
Yoshioka T, Blasdel GG, Levitt JB, Lund JS (1992) Patterns of lateral
connections in macaque visual area V1 revealed by biocytin histochemistry
and functional imaging. Soc Neurosci Abstr 18:299.
Bosking et al. ? Specificity of Horizontal Connections in Striate Cortex J. Neuro


