Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew Is
Regulated by Psychosocial Stress and NMDA Receptor Activation
Elizabeth Gould,1 Bruce S. McEwen,1 Patima Tanapat,1 Liisa A. M. Galea,1 and Eberhard Fuchs2
1The Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021, and 2The German Primate Center, 37077 Go? ttingen, Germany
These studies were designed to determine whether adult neurogenesis
occurs in the dentate gyrus of the tree shrew, an
animal phylogenetically between insectivores and primates,
and to explore the possibility that this process is regulated by
stressful experiences and NMDA receptor activation. We performed
immunohistochemistry for cell-specific markers and the
thymidine analog bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), a marker of DNA
synthesis that labels proliferating cells and their progeny, on the
brains of adult tree shrews subjected to psychosocial stress or
NMDA receptor antagonist treatment. Cells that incorporated
BrdU in the dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews were primarily
located in the subgranular zone, had morphological characteristics
of granule neuron precursors, and appeared to divide
within 24 hr after BrdU injection. Three weeks after BrdU injection,
BrdU-labeled cells had neuronal morphology, expressed
the neuronal marker neuron specific enolase, and were incorporated
into the granule cell layer. Vimentin-immunoreactive
radial glia were observed in the dentate gyrus with cell bodies
in the subgranular zone and processes extending into the
granule cell layer.
Exposure to acute psychosocial stress resulted in a rapid
decrease in the number of BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate
gyrus. In contrast, blockade of NMDA receptors, with the
NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801, resulted in an increase in
the number of BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus. These
results indicate that adult neurogenesis occurs in the tree
shrew dentate gyrus and is regulated by a stressful experience
and NMDA receptor activation. Furthermore, we suggest that
these characteristics may be common to most mammalian
species.
Key words: neurogenesis; tree shrew; psychosocial stress;
granule neurons; dentate gyrus; NMDA receptors
In most brain regions, the production of neurons is typically
confined to a discrete developmental period. In contrast, granule
neurons of the dentate gyrus are produced during an extended
period that begins during gestation and spans well into the postnatal
period in all mammalian species that have been examined,
including the mouse, rat, guinea pig, rabbit, cat, and rhesus
monkey (Angevine, 1965; Altman and Das, 1967; Schlessinger et
al., 1975; Rakic and Nowakowski, 1981; Gueneau et al., 1982;
Wyss and Sripanidkulchai, 1985). In the rat, granule neurons
continue to be produced in adulthood from a pool of precursor
cells that reside within the dentate gyrus (Kaplan and Hinds, 1977;
Kaplan and Bell, 1984). The granule neurons produced in adulthood
seem to migrate into the granule cell layer along existing
radial glia, extend axons, make synaptic contacts, and express
neuronal markers (Kaplan and Bell, 1984; Stanfield and Trice,
1988; Cameron et al., 1993; Okano et al., 1993; Kuhn et al., 1996).
The production of granule neurons in the adult rat dentate
gyrus has been shown to be suppressed by adrenal steroids (Cameron
and Gould, 1994) and excitatory input via the NMDA
receptor subtype of glutamate receptors (Cameron et al., 1995).
Because both circulating adrenal steroid levels and glutamatemediated
excitatory input to the hippocampus are enhanced by
stress (Krugers et al., 1993; Moghaddam et al., 1994; Bartanusz et
al., 1995), it is possible that stressful experiences naturally modulate
the production of granule neurons in the dentate gyrus of
adult animals. This possibility is supported by a recent study
showing that cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus of adult rats
can be suppressed by exposure to predator odor, a naturally
aversive experience (Galea et al., 1996).
Although the existence of neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of
adult rhesus monkeys has been dismissed (Eckenhoff and Rakic,
1988), this phenomenon has not been investigated in other species of
primates or tree shrews. The present studies were undertaken to
determine whether granule cell production and its regulation by
stressful experience and excitatory input occur in the dentate gyrus of
the adult tree shrew Tupaia belangeri. Tree shrews, which are considered
to be phylogenetically between insectivores and primates
(Martin, 1990), have been studied extensively in a well characterized
model of psychosocial stress. When paired with a same-sex conspecific,
tree shrews rapidly establish a potent, enduring dominant/
subordinate relationship that is particularly stressful to the subordinate
animal (von Holst, 1972). To determine whether granule cell
production occurs in the dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews, immunohistochemistry
for cell-specific markers and the thymidine analog
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), a marker of DNA synthesis, was performed
on the brains of adult tree shrews exposed to psychosocial
stress or NMDA receptor blockade.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal care and treatment
Adult (7 months to 2.5 years old) male tree shrews (Tupaia belangeri)
from the breeding colony at the German Primate Center (Go?ttingen,
Germany) were used in all experiments. Tree shrews are diurnal animals
that reach sexual maturity between 4 and 5 months and have a lifespan of
up to 12 years in captivity. All animal experimentation was conducted in
accordance with the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Guide for the
Received Oct. 11, 1996; revised Dec. 3, 1996; accepted Jan. 10, 1997.
This work was supported by National Institute of Mental Health Grant MH52423
and a National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression Young
Investigator Award (E.G.). We thank Dr. Gabrielle Flugge for assistance with
templates.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Elizabeth Gould, Department of
Psychology, Green Hall, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544.
Copyright q1997 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/97/172492-07$05.00/0
The Journal of Neuroscience, April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH Publication 85-23, revised
1985) and were approved by the government of Lower Saxony, Germany.
The animals were housed individually on a 12 hr/12 hr light/dark cycle
with artificial illumination from 8:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M. in air conditioned
rooms (for details, see Fuchs and Schumacher, 1990). All treatments were
performed during the day (lights on).
Experiment 1
To determine whether cells in the dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews
incorporate BrdU and divide, tree shrews were given a single i.p. injection
of BrdU [Sigma, St. Louis, MO; 75 mg/kg in saline and 0.007 N NaOH
(this dose was used in all experiments)]. After a survival time of 2 or 24
hr, the tree shrews (n 53 for each group) were anesthetized and perfused
transcardially (see below). The 2 hr survival time allows for incorporation
of BrdU by cells synthesizing DNA but not for completion of mitosis
(Nowakowski et al., 1989). BrdU is available for uptake into cells synthesizing
DNA for approximately 2 hr (Packard et al., 1973). The 24 hr
survival time allows for the completion of at least one cell cycle by cells
in S phase at the time of BrdU injection (Nowakowski et al., 1989).
Experiment 2
To determine whether cells that incorporate BrdU survive and express
the neuronal marker neuron specific enolase (NSE), tree shrews (n 53)
were given a single i.p. injection of BrdU and were anesthetized and
perfused transcardially 3 weeks later. In the dentate gyrus of the adult rat,
mature granule neurons, but not glia, express NSE (Cameron et al.,
1993). The majority of cells newly generated in the dentate gyrus of adult
rats have been shown to express NSE by 3 weeks after incorporation of
[
3
H]thymidine during DNA synthesis (Cameron et al., 1993).
Experiment 3
To determine whether cell proliferation can be modulated by a stressful
experience, tree shrews exposed to acute psychosocial stress were examined
(Fuchs et al., 1996). The experimental induction of psychosocial
conflict was carried out as follows. An opaque partition between the
neighboring cages of two males unknown to one another was removed.
This resulted in active competition for control over the enlarged territory
and the establishment of an obvious dominant/subordinate relationship.
Under these conditions, the subordinate animal became virtually immobile,
showed tail ruffling, and elicited alarm cries, whereas the dominant
tree shrew maintained a normal level and sphere of activity. After 1 hr,
the animals were separated again by the opaque partition and the
subordinate tree shrews (n 53) were given injections of BrdU. Subordinate
tree shrews demonstrate elevated urinary cortisol levels at this
time point compared with both control and dominant tree shrews (Magarinos
et al., 1996). Two hours after BrdU injection, the animals were
anesthetized and perfused transcardially. These animals were compared
to tree shrews (n 53) that were not exposed to a stressful experience but
received a single BrdU injection, followed by a 2 hr survival time.
Experiment 4
To determine whether the production of cells in the dentate gyrus of
adult tree shrews is affected by NMDA receptor activation, tree shrews
were given injections of the specific noncompetitive NMDA receptor
antagonist MK-801 (1.0 mg/kg in saline, i.p.; gift of Merck Research
Laboratories, Rahway, NJ) or saline (n 53 for each group). This dose has
been shown to stimulate granule cell production in the dentate gyrus of
adult rats (Cameron et al., 1995). Two hours after MK-801 treatment, the
animals were given injections of BrdU and were anesthetized and perfused
transcardially after a 2 hr survival time.
Histological procedures
After treatments, the tree shrews received an overdose of Rompum/
Ketanest and were perfused transcardially with 4.0% paraformaldehyde
in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB). The heads were postfixed overnight, and
the brains were removed from the skulls on the following day. Brain
sections (40 mm) were cut on an oscillating tissue slicer in a bath of PB.
BrdU and vimentin immunohistochemistry
For BrdU immunohistochemistry, the sections were permeabilized with
0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS for 1 hr, incubated with Pronase E (3
mg/ml) in PBS at 378C for 20 min, denatured in 2 N HCL for 20 min,
rinsed twice in PBS, and incubated overnight at 48C with monoclonal
antibody (mAb) against BrdU (Novocastra, Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom; 1:100 in PBS). The sections were rinsed in PBS, incubated for
1 hr in biotinylated mouse secondary antisera (Vector Laboratories,
Burlingame, CA; 1:50 in PBS), rinsed in PBS, incubated for 1 hr in
avidin? biotin? horseradish peroxidase (Vector, 1:50 in PBS), rinsed in
PBS, and reacted with diaminobenzidine and hydrogen peroxide in PBS.
After rinsing in PBS, the sections were mounted onto gelatinized glass
slides and stained for Nissl using cresyl violet.
Some brain sections that were not stained for BrdU were incubated
overnight in mAb against vimentin (Boehringer Mannheim, Indianapolis,
IN; clone V9, 1:50 in PBS). Vimentin, a cytoskeletal protein of immature
astroglia, is expressed by radial glia in the dentate gyrus of adult rats
(Gould et al., 1992). After this, the sections were processed for avidin?
biotin? horseradish peroxidase immunohistochemistry as described above
for BrdU staining.
Combined BrdU and NSE immunohistochemistry
Two different combined immunohistochemical methods were used to
visualize BrdU and NSE on the same brain section. In the first method,
the sections were reacted for BrdU immunohistochemistry as described
above. After several rinses in PBS, the sections were incubated overnight
in polyclonal antisera against NSE (Polysciences, Warrington, PA; 1:2000
in PBS). The sections were then rinsed in PBS and incubated for 2 hr in
FITC-conjugated rabbit antisera (Vector, 1:50 in PBS) with goat normal
serum, rinsed again, and mounted onto gelatinized slides and coverslipped
under Crystal Mount (Biomeda Corp., Foster City CA). In the
second method, the sections were reacted for BrdU immunohistochemistry
as described above, with the exception that the solution of diaminobenzidine
and hydrogen peroxide in PBS contained 2.5% nickel sulfate.
The sections were then rinsed several times in PBS and incubated
overnight in polyclonal antisera against NSE (Polysciences, 1:2000 in
PBS). After several rinses in PBS, the sections were incubated for 1 hr in
biotinylated rabbit antisera and reacted using the avidin? biotin? horseradish
peroxidase protocol as described above.
Data analysis
For each experiment, the slides were coded before quantitative analysis,
and the code was not broken until the analysis was complete. For
each brain, at least six sections were selected for analysis from middle
to caudal dentate gyrus (between levels A 2.0 and A 3.0; see Tigges and
Shantha, 1969). For each selected section, the number of BrdU-labeled
cells was counted in the dentate gyrus [the granule cell layer (gcl) and
hilus combined]. The cross-sectional area of the dentate gyrus was
determined by use of a Zeiss Interactive Digitizing Analysis System
(ZIDAS), and the data were expressed as densities (number of cells/
mm2
). Means were determined for these variables, and the data were
subjected to two-tailed Student?s t tests. For brain sections immunostained
for both BrdU and NSE, the percentage of BrdU-labeled cells
that were NSE-immunoreactive was determined.
RESULTS
BrdU incorporation in the dentate gyrus of adult tree
shrews with 2 hr or 24 hr survival times
The dentate gyrus of tree shrews processed for BrdU immunohistochemistry
at 2 and 24 hr survival times after BrdU injection revealed
BrdU-labeled cells throughout the dentate gyrus at all levels examined
(Figs. 1?3). These cells were typically observed in the subgranular
zone (sgz), on the border of the gcl and the hilus (Figs. 1? 4), as
well as within the gcl and hilus. There were no obvious differences in
the distribution of BrdU-immunoreactive cells at different levels of
the dentate gyrus for either time point (Figs. 1?3).
Most of the BrdU-labeled cells (;85%) had the morphological
characteristics of granule cell precursors, i.e., round or oval,
medium-sized cell bodies (Fig. 4). The remaining BrdUimmunoreactive
cells had the morphological characteristics of
glial cells, i.e., triangular or irregular, small cell bodies. Quantitative
analysis revealed a significant increase in the number of
BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus (.2 times) between 2 and
24 hr after BrdU injection [t(4) 5 27.337; p ,0.005, see Table 1].
Despite this increase in cell number, the location of the BrdUlabeled
cells did not change between 2 and 24 hr (Figs. 1?3).
Gould et al. ? Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew J. Neurosci., April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498 2493
Moreover, the cross-sectional area of the dentate gyrus did not
change between 2 and 24 hr after BrdU injection (2 hr 51.5 6
0.02 mm2
, 24 hr 51.5 60.01 mm2
; p ,0.4).
Vimentin immunoreactivity in the dentate gyrus of
adult tree shrews
Light microscopic examination of vimentin-immunoreactive tissue
revealed numerous stained cells with the morphological characteristics
of radial glia, i.e., triangular shaped cell bodies with radial
processes (Fig. 4). These cells were usually oriented with the cell
bodies in the sgz and the processes extending through the gcl
(Fig. 4). There were no detectable differences in the distribution
of vimentin-immunoreactive cells at different levels of the dentate
gyrus.
Combined BrdU and NSE immunohistochemistry after
a 3 week survival time
Three weeks after BrdU injection, numerous BrdU-labeled cells
(;20 per section) remained detectable in the dentate gyrus (Figs.
1?3). These cells were located predominantly in the gcl, although
Figure 1. Template showing a coronal half-section of the tree shrew brain at level A 3.0 (see Tigges and Shantha, 1969), demonstrating that the number
and distribution of BrdU-labeled cells (open circles) change with increased survival time after BrdU injection. Two hours after BrdU injection, most
labeled cells are located in the sgz, on the border of the gcl and hilus. Twenty-four hours after BrdU injection, more than twice as many BrdU-labeled
cells are observed in the dentate gyrus, predominantly in the sgz. By 3 weeks after BrdU injection, most BrdU-labeled cells are located in the gcl and
express NSE (solid dots). cc, Corpus callosum; lv, lateral ventricle; 3V, third ventricle; h, hilus; CA1, CA1 region; CA3, CA3 region.
Figure 2. Template showing a coronal half-section of the tree shrew brain at level A 2.5 (see Tigges and Shantha, 1969), showing changes in the number
and distribution of BrdU-labeled cells (open circles) with increased survival time after BrdU injection. Two hours after BrdU injection, most labeled cells
are located in the sgz, between the gcl and hilus. Twenty-four hours after BrdU injection, more than two times as many BrdU-labeled cells are observed
in the dentate gyrus, but their distribution remains similar to the 2 hr time point. Three weeks after BrdU injection, most BrdU-labeled cells are located
in the gcl and are NSE-immunoreactive (solid dots). cc, Corpus callosum; lv, lateral ventricle; 3V, third ventricle; h, hilus; CA1, CA1 region; CA3, CA3
region.
2494 J. Neurosci., April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498 Gould et al. ? Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew
a few remained in the sgz and hilus. Both immunohistochemical
methods for double labeling BrdU and NSE yielded similar results;
;80% of the BrdU-labeled cells were NSEimmunoreactive.
All of the cells that were labeled with BrdU and
NSE were located in the gcl (Figs. 1?3) and had the morphological
characteristics of granule neurons.
Effects of psychosocial stress on the number of BrdUlabeled
cells in the dentate gyrus
Exposure to a single episode of acute psychosocial stress that
lasted 1 hr resulted in a significant decrease in the density of
BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus compared to unstressed
controls [t(4) 5 23.807; p ,0.05; Table 1]. No change in the
cross-sectional area of the dentate gyrus was observed after acute
psychosocial stress (control 51.5 60.5 mm2
, stress 51.2 60.4
mm2
; p ,0.4), indicating that this difference reflects a change in
the number of proliferating cells. The morphological characteristics
of BrdU-labeled cells did not differ between the tree shrews
subjected to psychosocial stress and unstressed control animals.
Effects of NMDA receptor antagonist treatment on the
number of BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus
Treatment with the NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801 resulted
in a significant increase in the density of BrdU-labeled cells in the
dentate gyrus [t(4) 5 22.945, p ,0.05; Table 1). No change in the
cross-sectional area of the dentate gyrus was observed after MKFigure
3. Template showing a coronal half-section of the tree shrew brain at level A 2.0 (see Tigges and Shantha, 1969), indicating changes in the number
and distribution of BrdU-labeled cells (open circles) with increased survival time after BrdU injection. Most BrdU-labeled cells are located in the sgz,
between the gcl and hilus at the 2 and 24 hr time points. Three weeks after BrdU injection, most BrdU-labeled cells are located in the gcl and are
NSE-immunoreactive (solid dots). cc, Corpus callosum; 3V, third ventricle; h, hilus; CA1, CA1 region; CA3, CA3 region.
Figure 4. Examples of cell types in the dentate
gyrus of the adult tree shrew. A, BrdUlabeled
cell (arrows) in the sgz of the dentate
gyrus with morphological characteristics of
granule cell precursor, i.e., round or oval
medium-sized cell body. B, Cluster of BrdUlabeled
cells (arrows) in the sgz of the dentate
gyrus after MK-801 treatment. C, Vimentinimmunoreactive
cell with radial glial morphology,
i.e., irregular shaped cell body with
radial process. The cell body is located on the
border of the hilus and gcl, and the process
extends through the gcl. g, Granule cell layer;
h, hilus. Scale bar in B, 20 mm (applies to all
frames).
Gould et al. ? Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew J. Neurosci., April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498 2495
801 treatment (control 51.4 60.3 mm2
; MK-801-treated 51.1 6
0.2 mm2
; p ,0.4). In MK-801-treated tree shrews, BrdU-labeled
cells had morphological characteristics that were similar to those
of controls, and these cells were often observed in clusters of 3?5
on the border of the gcl and hilus (Fig. 4).
DISCUSSION
The results of this report demonstrate that cells in the dentate
gyrus of adult tree shrews incorporate BrdU, a marker of DNA
synthesis that labels proliferating cells and their progeny. The
observation that the number of BrdU-labeled cells more than
doubles between 2 and 24 hr suggests that cells synthesizing DNA
in the dentate gyrus divide at least once within a 24 hr period.
Furthermore, the detection of BrdU-labeled cells that express a
neuronal marker and have granule cell morphology 3 weeks after
BrdU incorporation suggests that many proliferating cells in the
dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews eventually become granule
neurons. Moreover, the presence of radial glia with cell bodies in
the sgz and processes extending through the gcl, as well as the
change in location of BrdU-labeled cells from 24 hr to 3 weeks,
suggests that newly generated cells migrate from the hilus or sgz
to the gcl. Finally, these results also show that the production of
cells in the dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews can be modulated
rapidly by exposure to a stressful social encounter, as well as by
changing the level of NMDA receptor activation.
Granule cell generation across mammalian species
Previous studies have demonstrated several characteristics of dentate
gyrus granule cell production that are common to numerous
mammalian species, from rats to rhesus monkeys. First, granule
cell production occurs during an extended period that begins
during gestation and continues into the postnatal period (Schlessinger
et al., 1975; Rakic and Nowakowski, 1981; Altman and
Bayer, 1990a,b). This feature seems to be unrelated to the degree
of maturity at birth as both altricial species (e.g., the rat) and
precocial species (e.g., the guinea pig) demonstrate this phenomenon
(Altman and Das, 1967; Schlessinger et al., 1975). Second,
suprapyramidal to infrapyramidal and outside-in gradients of
granule cell generation exist (Schlessinger et al., 1975; Rakic and
Nowakowski, 1981). Third, the location of granule cell precursors
changes during development; precursor cells originate in the
subependymal layer, next reside in the hilus, and finally in the sgz
(Rakic and Nowakowski, 1981; Altman and Bayer, 1990a,b). However,
there are characteristics of granule cell production that are
not shared by all mammals examined. One prominent difference
in granule cell generation between the rat and the monkey is in
the developmental stage at which the majority of neurons are
produced. In the rat, most (;80%) granule cells are produced
postnatally, whereas in the rhesus monkey, most are produced
prenatally (Schlessinger et al., 1975; Rakic and Nowakowski,
1981).
The extension of granule neuron production into adulthood has
been well documented in the rat (Kaplan and Bell, 1984; Stanfield
and Trice, 1988; Cameron et al., 1993; Okano et al., 1993) and
recently demonstrated in the meadow vole, another species of
rodent (Galea and McEwen, 1995). In contrast, few studies have
investigated the possibility that adult neurogenesis occurs in the
dentate gyrus of nonrodent mammalian species. One report dismissed
the possibility that granule cells are produced in adulthood
in the dentate gyrus of rhesus monkeys and suggested that adult
neurogenesis is a phenomenon unique to rats, particularly strains
that increase in size throughout life (Eckenhoff and Rakic, 1988).
However, it is unlikely that considerable growth in adulthood is
the basis for adult neurogenesis because the guinea pig, an animal
that undergoes little brain growth during the postnatal period,
appears to produce granule neurons in adulthood (Altman and
Das, 1967). Rather, it appears that the mammalian dentate gyrus
is a specialized brain region in which neurogenesis continues into
adulthood regardless of the developmental pattern of the animal.
In light of recent findings, the possibility that adult neurogenesis
occurs in the dentate gyrus of most mammals, including other
primate species, should be reconsidered. First, the results of this
study have demonstrated granule neuron production and its regulation
by neural activity and behavioral events in the dentate
gyrus of the adult tree shrew. Second, we have observed BrdUlabeled
cells with the morphology of immature granule neurons,
as well as vimentin-immunoreactive radial glia, in the dentate
gyrus of adult marmoset monkeys (Callithrix jacchus) and an adult
cynomolgus (Macaca fascicularis) monkey (our unpublished observations).
Moreover, the recent observations that precursor cells
capable of generating neurons exist in the subependymal layer of
adult humans (Kirschenbaum et al., 1994) suggest a reevaluation
of the limits of neurogenesis across species in other regions
as well.
Significance of radial glia in the adult brain
During development, radial glia are believed to participate in the
migration of immature neurons from their site of origin to their
final destination. The results of this study and our previous report
(Gould et al., 1992) indicate that the dentate gyrus maintains a
population of radial glia in adulthood in both the tree shrew and
rat. In addition, cells produced in the dentate gyrus of both the
tree shrew and the rat (Cameron et al., 1993) move from the hilus
or sgz to the gcl after DNA synthesis, suggesting that radial glia
guide migrating granule cells in adulthood. It should be noted,
though, that the processes of radial glia are considerably longer
than the distances immature granule cells appear to migrate in the
adult. A recent report indicates that radial glia in the dentate
gyrus of adult rats are associated with the dendrites of immature
granule neurons (Seki and Arai, 1996), presenting the possibility
Table 1. The number of proliferating cells in the dentate gyrus of adult tree shrews at different survival times after BrdU injection, as well as after
psychosocial stress or MK-801 treatment
Number of BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus/mm2
Time course experiment Stress experiment MK-801 experiment
2 hr 24 hr Control Subordinate Control MK-801
7.9 61.5 22.7 61.3* 6.8 61.3* 1.6 60.3* 11.8 62.1 19.8 61.7*
Values represent mean 6SEM each obtained from three tree shrews. Asterisks represent significant difference from 2 hr (time course experiment) or control (stress or MK-801
experiment); p ,0.05, unpaired Student?s t tests.
2496 J. Neurosci., April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498 Gould et al. ? Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew
that radial glia may serve other developmental functions, in addition
to migration, such as supporting the growing dendritic tree.
NMDA receptor activation regulates cell proliferation
The results of this study also suggest that intrinsic factors regulating
the production of granule neurons in the adult dentate
gyrus may be common to mammalian species that undergo adult
neurogenesis. Treatment with MK-801, a noncompetitive NMDA
receptor antagonist, resulted in a rapid increase in the number of
cells synthesizing DNA, suggesting that NMDA receptor activation
normally inhibits cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus of the
tree shrew. These results are consistent with our previous studies
demonstrating that NMDA receptor blockade or activation increases
or decreases, respectively, the production of granule cells
in the dentate gyrus of adult rats (Cameron et al., 1995). Excitation
may inhibit neurogenesis by preventing the synthesis or
release of mitogenic factors from cells in the vicinity of precursor
cells. Several studies have shown that stressful experiences rapidly
stimulate glutamate release and alter the expression of NMDA
receptors in the hippocampus of the rat (Krugers et al., 1993;
Moghaddam et al., 1994; Bartanusz et al., 1995). Collectively,
these results suggest that stressful experiences inhibit the production
of granule neurons via actions on excitatory pathways to the
dentate gyrus.
Psychosocial stress inhibits cell proliferation
The functional consequences of adult neurogenesis in the dentate
gyrus are presently unknown. One approach to elucidating the
function of granule neuron production in adulthood is to identify
the factors that regulate its occurrence. The results of this study
have shown that a brief exposure to psychosocial stress, during
which a dominant/subordinate relationship is established, results
in a rapid decrease in the number of cells that incorporate BrdU
in the dentate gyrus of the subordinate animal. After a single
encounter with a dominant tree shrew, the subordinate will remain
in a constant state of arousal in the presence of the dominant
animal. This stress reaction is characterized by a reduced
sphere of activity, vigilance, alarm cries, and tail ruffling (von
Holst, 1972). When removed from the presence of the dominant
after the initial encounter, subordinate tree shrews will recover
physically but will demonstrate immediate stress reactions after
subsequent exposures to the dominant (von Holst, 1972), indicating
that a potent memory of the experience has been formed.
Because the hippocampus has been implicated in spatial learning
and memory (Sutherland et al., 1983; Wishaw, 1987; McNaughton
et al., 1989), as well as in contextual learning in conditioned fear
paradigms (Phillips and LeDoux, 1992), it is possible that stressinduced
stabilization of the granule cell population may be necessary
for learning during a threatening social encounter. The
production of new granule neurons for increased storage capacity
may be permitted only during periods of low stress when learning
is not critical.
In the tree shrew, the stress of subordination is mediated by
visual and not olfactory cues; exposure to the olfactory markings
or the odor of the dominant does not elicit a reaction (von Holst,
1972). We have shown that exposure of adult rats to fox odor,
which increases both adrenal steroid levels and excitatory input
(Heale et al., 1994; Vernet-Maury et al., 1984), rapidly inhibits cell
proliferation in the dentate gyrus (Galea et al., 1996). Collectively,
these findings suggest that rapid suppression of cell proliferation
by a threatening experience, conveyed via cues from different
sensory modalities, is a characteristic of the dentate gyrus that is
common to mammalian species that undergo adult neurogenesis.
REFERENCES
Altman J, Bayer SA (1990a) Mosaic organization of the hippocampal
neuroepithelium and the multiple germinal sources of dentate granule
cells. J Comp Neurol 301:325?342.
Altman J, Bayer SA (1990b) Migration and distribution of two populations
of hippocampal granule cell precursors during the perinatal and
postnatal periods. J Comp Neurol 301:365?381.
Altman J, Das GD (1967) Postnatal neurogenesis in the guinea-pig.
Nature 214:1098 ?1101.
Angevine JB (1965) Time of neuron origin in the hippocampal region: an
autoradiographic study in the mouse. Exp Neurol 2:1?17.
Bartanusz V, Aubry J-M, Pagliusi S, Jezova D, Baffi J, Kiss JZ (1995)
Stress-induced changes in messenger RNA levels of N-methyl-Daspartate
and AMPA receptor subunits in selected regions of the rat
hippocampus and hypothalamus. Neuroscience 66:247?252.
Cameron HA, Gould E (1994) Adult neurogenesis is regulated by adrenal
steroids in the dentate gyrus. Neuroscience 61:203?209.
Cameron HA, McEwen BS, Gould E (1995) Regulation of adult neurogenesis
by excitatory input and NMDA receptor activation in the
dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 15:4687? 4692.
Cameron HA, Woolley CS, McEwen BS, Gould E (1993) Differentiation
of newly born neurons and glia in the dentate gyrus of the adult rat.
Neuroscience 56:337?344.
Eckenhoff MF, Rakic P (1988) Nature and fate of proliferative cells in
the hippocampal dentate gyrus during the life span of the rhesus
monkey. J Neurosci 8:2729 ?2747.
Fuchs E, Schumacher M (1990) Psychosocial stress affects pineal function
in the tree shrew (Tupaia belangeri). Physiol Behav 47:713?717.
Fuchs E, Kramer M, Hermes B, Netter B, Hiemke C (1996) Psychosocial
stress in tree shrews: clomipramine counteracts behavioral and endocrine
changes. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 54:219 ?228.
Galea LAM, McEwen BS (1995) Sex differences in adult neurogenesis in
the wild-trapped meadow vole. Soc Neurosci Abstr 21:1287.
Galea LAM, Tanapat P, Gould E (1996) Exposure to predator odor
suppresses cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus of adult rats via a
cholinergic mechanism. Soc Neurosci Abstr 22:1196.
Gould E, Cameron HA, Daniels DC, Woolley CS, McEwen BS (1992)
Adrenal hormones suppress cell division in the adult rat dentate gyrus.
J Neurosci 12:3642?3650.
Gueneau G, Privat A, Drouet J, Court L (1982) Subgranular zone of the
dentate gyrus of young rabbits as a secondary matrix. Dev Neurosci
5:345?358.
Heale VR, Vanderwolf CH, Kavaliers M (1994) Components of weasel
and fox odors elicit fast wave bursts in the dentate gyrus of rats. Behav
Brain Res 63:159 ?165.
Kaplan MS, Bell DH (1984) Mitotic neuroblasts in the 9-day-old and
11-month-old rodent hippocampus. J Neurosci 4:1429 ?1441.
Kaplan MS, Hinds JW (1977) Neurogenesis in the adult rat: electron
microscopic analysis of light radioautographs. Science 197:1092?1094.
Kirschenbaum B, Nedergaard M, Preuss A, Barami K, Fraser RA, Goldman
SA (1994) In vitro neuronal production and differentiation by
precursor cells derived from the adult human forebrain. Cereb Cortex
4:576 ?589.
Krugers HJ, Koolhaas JM, Bohua B, Korf J (1993) A single stress experience
alters glutamate receptor-binding in rat hippocampal CA3 area.
Neurosci Lett 154:73?77.
Kuhn HG, Dickinson-Anson H, Gage FH (1996) Neurogenesis in the
dentate gyrus of the adult rat: age-related decrease in neuronal progenitor
population. J Neurosci 16:2027?2033.
Magarinos AM, McEwen BS, Flugge G, Fuchs E (1996) Chronic psychosocial
stress causes apical dendritic atrophy of hippocampal CA3 pyramidal
neurons in subordinate tree shrews. J Neurosci 16:3534 ?3540.
Martin RD (1990) Primate origins and evolution. London: Chapman &
Hall.
McNaughton BL, Barnes CA, Meltzer J, Sutherland RJ (1989) Hippocampal
granule cells are necessary for normal spatial learning but not
for spatially-selective pyramidal cell discharge. Exp Brain Res
76:485? 496.
Moghaddam B, Boliano ML, Stein-Behrens B, Sapolsky R (1994) Glucocorticoids
mediate the stress-induced extracellular accumulation of
glutamate. Brain Res 655:251?154.
Nowakowski RS, Lewin SB, Miller MW (1989) Bromodeoxyuridine immunohistochemical
determination of the lengths of the cell cycle and
the DNA-synthetic phase for an anatomically defined population.
J Neurocytol 18:311?318.
Gould et al. ? Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus of the Adult Tree Shrew J. Neurosci., April 1, 1997, 17(7):2492?2498 2497
Okano HJ, Pfaff DW, Gibbs RB (1993) RB and Cdc2 expression in brain:
correlations with [3
H]thymidine incorporation and neurogenesis. J Neurosci
13:2930 ?2938.
Packard DS, Menzies RA, Skalko RG (1973) Incorporation of thymidine
and its analog, bromodeoxyuridine, into embryos and maternal tissues
of the mouse. Differentiation 1:397? 405.
Phillips RG, LeDoux JE (1992) Differential contribution of amygdala
and hippocampus to cued and contextual fear conditioning. Behav
Neurosci 106:274 ?285.
Rakic P, Nowakowski RS (1981) The time of origin of neurons in the
hippocampal region of the rhesus monkey. J Comp Neurol 196:99 ?128.
Schlessinger AR, Cowan WM, Gottlieb DI (1975) An autoradiographic
study of the time of origin and the pattern of granule cell migration in
the dentate gyrus of the rat. J Comp Neurol 159:159 ?176.
Seki T, Arai Y (1996) Dendritic development of newly-generated granule
cells in the adult hippocampus occurs upon contact with radial glia-like
cells. Soc Neurosci Abstr 22:534.
Stanfield BB, Trice JE (1988) Evidence that granule cells generated in
the dentate gyrus of adult rats extend axonal projections. Exp Brain Res
72:399 ? 406.
Sutherland RJ, Whishaw IQ, Kolb B (1983) A behavioural analysis of
spatial localization following electrolytic, kainate- or colchicine-induced
damage to the hippocampal formation in the rat. Behav Brain Res
7:133?153.
Tigges J, Shantha TR (1969) A stereotaxic atlas of the tree shrew (Tupaia
glis). Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
Vernet-Maury E, Polak EH, Demael A (1984) Structure-activity relationship
of stress-inducing odorants in the rat. J Chem Ecol
10:1007?1019.
von Holst D (1972) Social stress in the tree-shrew: its causes and physiological
and ethological consequences. In: Prosimian biology (Martin
RD, Doyle GA, Walker AC, eds), pp 389 ? 411. Philadelphia: University
of Pittsburgh.
Whishaw IQ (1987) Hippocampal, granule cell and CA3? 4 lesions impair
formation of a place learning-set in the rat and induce reflex
epilepsy. Behav Brain Res 24:59 ?72.
Wyss JM, Sripanidkulchai B (1985) The development of Ammon?s horn
and the fascia dentata in the cat: a [3
H]thymidine analysis. Brain Res
350:185?198.

Orientation Selectivity and the Arrangement of Horizontal
Connections in Tree Shrew Striate Cortex
William H. Bosking, Ying Zhang, Brett Schofield, and David Fitzpatrick
Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710
Horizontal connections, formed primarily by the axon collaterals
of pyramidal neurons in layer 2/3 of visual cortex, extend for
millimeters parallel to the cortical surface and form patchy
terminations. Previous studies have provided evidence that the
patches formed by horizontal connections exhibit modular
specificity, preferentially linking columns of neurons with similar
response characteristics, such as preferred orientation. The
issue of how these connections are distributed with respect to
the topographic map of visual space, however, has not been
resolved. Here we combine optical imaging of intrinsic signals
with small extracellular injections of biocytin to assess quantitatively
the specificity of horizontal connections with respect to
both the map of orientation preference and the map of visual
space in tree shrew V1. Our results indicate that horizontal
connections outside a radius of 500 mm from the injection site
exhibit not only modular specificity, but also specificity for axis
of projection. Labeled axons extend for longer distances, and
give off more terminal boutons, along an axis in the map of
visual space that corresponds to the preferred orientation of the
injection site. Inside of 500 mm, the pattern of connections is
much less specific, with boutons found along every axis, contacting
sites with a wide range of preferred orientations. The
system of long-range horizontal connections can be summarized
as preferentially linking neurons with co-oriented, coaxially
aligned receptive fields. These observations suggest
specific ways that horizontal circuits contribute to the response
properties of layer 2/3 neurons and to mechanisms of visual
perception.
Key words: orientation selectivity; topography; optical imaging;
visual cortex; surround effects; tree shrew; biocytin; horizontal
connections
Horizontal connections are a prominent feature of the intrinsic
circuitry of the visual cortex. These connections originate primarily
from pyramidal cells, extend for 2?5 mm parallel to the cortical
surface, and terminate in a highly selective and patchy manner
(Gilbert and Wiesel, 1979, 1983; Rockland and Lund, 1982). A
number of experiments have focused on the relationship between
the patches formed by horizontal connections and well known
modular features of cortical organization such as orientation
columns, ocular dominance columns and cytochrome oxidase-rich
blobs (Livingstone and Hubel, 1984; T?so et al., 1986; Gilbert and
Wiesel, 1989; Malach et al., 1993). The results from these experiments
suggest that the patchy nature of horizontal connections
can be explained by a simple rule: horizontal connections link
together select subsets of neurons that share similar receptive
field properties. Studies in both cat and monkey visual cortex, for
example, have shown that horizontal connections selectively link
patches of neurons that have similar orientation preferences (Gilbert
and Wiesel, 1989; Malach et al., 1993).
The relationship of horizontal connections to another fundamental
aspect of cortical organization?the orderly map of visual
space?is less clear. This issue is of interest because the axon
arbors of individual neurons are often elongated across the cortical
surface, extending further and giving rise to more terminals
along one axis of the map than others (Gilbert and Wiesel, 1983,
1989; Matsubara et al., 1985, 1987; McGuire et al., 1991; Kisvarday
and Eysel, 1992; Amir et al., 1993, Malach et al., 1993). Furthermore,
the results of several physiological and perceptual studies have led to
the suggestion that the effects mediated by horizontal connections
are not distributed randomly about a point in visual space, but are
aligned along an axis that corresponds to a neuron?s preferred
orientation. For example, a collinear arrangement of horizontal
connections has been implicated in the construction of the elongated
receptive fields of layer 6 neurons in cat striate cortex (Bolz and
Gilbert, 1989). Likewise, perceptual studies of contour integration
and physiological studies of receptive field surround effects in layer
2/3 neurons have provided evidence for facilitatory effects that are
much stronger in regions of visual space that lie along the axis of
preferred orientation than in regions that lie off this axis (Nelson and
Frost, 1985; Fiorani et al., 1992; Field et al., 1993; Polat and Sagi,
1993; Kapadia et al., 1995). Despite the evidence for anisotropic
physiological and psychophysical effects, the relationship between the
axis of elongation of horizontal connections and the orientation
preference of the neurons they interconnect has never been systematically
examined.
In the experiments described here, we have combined optical
imaging of intrinsic signals with small extracellular injections of
biocytin to quantitatively assess both the modular and axial arrangement
of horizontal connections established by neurons of
known orientation preference in layer 2/3 of tree shrew striate
cortex. Our results demonstrate a remarkable degree of specificity
for both features of horizontal connectivity, and suggest several
ways that horizontal connections could contribute to the response
properties of layer 2/3 neurons.
Received Aug. 5, 1996; revised Dec. 9, 1996; accepted Dec. 12, 1996.
This work was supported by National Eye Institute Grant EY06821. We thank
Martha Foster for expert assistance with histology and plotting of bouton data, Mike
Weliky for assistance with software, and Len White, Michele Pucak, and Justin
Crowley for comments on this manuscript.
Correspondence should be addressed to William H. Bosking, Box 3209, Department
of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.
Copyright q1997 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/97/172112-16$05.00/0
The Journal of Neuroscience, March 15, 1997, 17(6):2112?2127
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental design. Small extracellular injections of biocytin were made
in 13 animals. Distributions of labeled boutons resulting from the injections
were plotted and analyzed manually (3 cases) or with the assistance
of a computer reconstruction system and software routines written in our
lab (10 cases, see below for details). Analysis of modular specificity of the
bouton distributions was accomplished in 7 of these 10 cases by using
optical imaging of intrinsic signals to determine the map of orientation
preference in V1 before injection of the biocytin. Analysis of the bouton
distributions with respect to the map of visual space was accomplished in
all 13 of the cases. Optical imaging was also used to investigate the
geometry of the map of visual space in three animals that were not used
for analysis of specificity of connections.
Animal surgery. Tree shrews were initially anesthetized with a mixture
of ketamine hydrochloride (200 mg/kg) and xylazine (4.7 mg/kg) given by
intramuscular injection. Atropine sulfate (0.08 mg) was given subcutaneously
to reduce secretions. An intraperitoneal cannula was inserted,
the trachea intubated, and the animal was placed in a modified
stereotaxic frame allowing unobstructed viewing of the stimulus monitor.
During surgery, anesthesia was maintained with a 2:1 mixture of N2O/O2
supplemented with 2% halothane. Body temperature was maintained
with a thermostatically controlled heating blanket. The eyes were kept
moist by using planar contact lenses. An incision was made in the scalp,
muscle and fascia reflected, and the bone overlying visual cortex was
thinned by scraping with a fine scalpel. Wound margins and incisions were
treated with a long-acting local anesthetic (bupivacaine) and pressure
points were treated with a lidocaine ointment. The animal was paralyzed
using pancuronium bromide (0.8 mg initial dose for first 1.5 hr, then 0.2
mg/hr) administered through the intraperitoneal cannula to prevent eye
movements, and artificially respired at a rate and volume sufficient to
maintain expired CO2 at 3? 4%. During optical imaging, halothane levels
were reduced to 1%, and the N2O/O2 mixture to 1:1. Any signs of distress
evident in the electrocardiogram or expired CO2 were treated by immediately
increasing the level of halothane.
Optical imaging. Optical imaging of intrinsic signals was accomplished
using an enhanced video acquisition system (Optical Imaging Inc.) applying
techniques similar to those of Grinvald and colleagues (Grinvald et
al., 1986; Bonhoeffer and Grinvald, 1991, 1993). Images were obtained
directly through the thinned bone overlying the V1 area. The cortex was
illuminated with orange light (605 nm) and visualized with a tandem lens
macroscope attached to a low noise video camera. Visual stimulation for
optical imaging was provided by a separate stimulus computer (386 PC
with SGT1graphics board and STIM software provided by Kaare Christian).
The stimuli used consisted of high-contrast square wave gratings
(6.258dark phase, 1.258light phase, drifted at 22.58/sec). Four gratings of
orientation 08, 458, 908, and 1358with respect to horizontal were used.
Each grating was moved back and forth along an axis that was orthogonal
to the orientation of the grating. Data were acquired during between 20
and 80 presentations of each stimulus. The summed images acquired
during the presentation of one grating were subtracted from the summed
images acquired during presentation of the orthogonal grating to create
differential maps of orientation preference (difference images), (Blasdel,
1992). Difference images were 655 3480 pixels in resolution, with either
62 or 75 pixels per millimeter depending on the lens combination used.
Resulting difference images were smoothed using a 7 37 pixel mean filter
kernel. Low frequency noise was reduced by convolving the image with a
40 340 pixel mean filter kernel and subtracting the result from the
original image. Difference images were normalized by dividing the deviation
from the mean at each pixel by the average absolute deviation
across the entire image (Weliky et al., 1995). Finally, vector summation of
the difference images was done on a pixel by pixel basis to create a color
coded orientation preference map (Bonhoeffer and Grinvald, 1991,1993;
Blasdel, 1992).
Optical imaging of the geometry of the map of visual space in V1 was
accomplished using procedures similar to those developed by Campbell
and Blasdel (1995). The technique uses difference imaging for spatial
location to identify areas of cortex that respond preferentially to stimulation
of a particular line in visual space. The stimuli used consisted of
two gratings of the same orientation, each with a period of 108but
differing in the width and spatial location of the light phase of the grating
(grating 1 518light phase, 98dark phase; grating 2 538light phase, 78
dark phase). The two gratings were placed and moved in such a way that
the light phases of the gratings covered non-overlapping regions of the
stimulus monitor (grating 1 moved 618from original position, grating 2
moved 628from original position). Images acquired during presentation
of grating 2 were subtracted from images acquired during presentation of
grating 1 for each orientation to create topographic difference images.
Topographic difference images were smoothed with a 7 37 pixel mean
filter kernel for presentation.
At the conclusion of the optical imaging phase of the experiment, a
reference image of the surface blood vessels was acquired, while the cortex
was illuminated with green (540 nm) light.
Biocytin injections. Injection sites were selected by examining the difference
images and orientation preference maps to find an area of
relatively constant orientation preference. Selected sites were located
using blood vessels visible in the reference image and on the cortical
surface as seen under a surgical microscope. The orientation tuning of the
injection site was confirmed by recording multi-unit activity through the
injection micropipette. Tuning curves were obtained by averaging responses
from 5? 8 trials of 9 oriented stimuli. Iontophoretic injections
were made with glass micro pipettes with a tip diameter of ;10 mm
containing 5% biocytin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in saline using pulsed
current (7 sec on, 7 sec off) of 2.5 mamps for 10 ?15 min. After the
injection the animal was sutured, recovered from paralytic and anesthesia,
and returned to its cage.
Tissue processing. After a 16 hr recovery period, the animal was deeply
anesthetized with Nembutal (25 mg, i.p.) and transcardially perfused with
0.9% saline, followed by 10% formalin in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer.
The brain was removed and a block of cortex containing V1 was flattened
while immersed in 20% sucrose in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer and
maintained at 48C overnight. The following day 40 mm tangential sections
were cut from the block on a freezing microtome. Care was taken to
collect a first section that contained outlines of the surface vasculature, so
that the tissue sections could later be aligned with the reference image.
Our procedures for visualization of the biocytin label have been published
