Shrews

Shrews are the smallest of the mammals. They are often mistaken for mice but are insectivores, not
rodents. There are currently ten species of shrews known in Alaska. To most people they all look alike; but
to experts, each has a different skull characteristic or lives in a restricted area. They are found throughout
Alaska, even on some isolated islands. As yet no shrews have been found on the Aleutian Island chain west
of False Pass.
General description: All species of shrews in Alaska belong to one family, Soricidae, and are members of
one genus, Sorex. The family is distributed throughout the world except Greenland, Australia, southern
South American and some Pacific islands. Shrews are small, ranging in size from 74-158 mm (3-6.5 inches)
total length. Their tails are typically from one-quarter to one-half of their length. They weigh from 1.5-20
grams (a penny weighs 3 grams). Most are a grayish-brown coloration with a paler colored belly. Some are
distinctly bicolored. Shrews are short-legged and have a long pointed nose with long whiskers. Their teeth are tiny, white with reddish-brown tips, but sharp for
attacking and eating prey. Their tails are hairy in young shrews but usually naked in old adults. Shrews have musk glands that give off a strong odor, especially
when handled. Their eyes are tiny and vision is poor, but they have acute senses of smell and hearing.
Distribution and life history: Shrews live in all habitats in Alaska from the rain forests of Southeast to the arctic tundra. Most of the species are genetically related
to other species in Asia or North America. Shrews have not been so intensively studied as other mammals, and their distribution is not exactly known. Two of the
species, the St. Lawrence Island shrew (Sorex jacksoni) and the Pribilof Island shrew (S. hydrodromus), live only on their respective islands. The Glacier Bay
water shrew (S. alaskanus) is known from Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve in southeast Alaska. The barrenground shrew (S. ugyunak) lives on the North
Slope and is related to Asian shrews, as is the tundra shrew (S. tundrensis) which lives throughout most of Alaska except for the Southeast. Two shrews, the
masked or common shrew (S. cinereus) and dusky shrew (S. monticolus), are the most widespread, occurring from the crest of the Brooks Range through
Southeast Alaska. The water shrew (S. palustris) has been found in the Alaska Range south through Southcentral to Southeast Alaska. The pygmy shrew (S.
hoyi) occurs through most of Alaska except on the North Slope and Southeast Alaska. A recently identified species unique to Alaska, the tiny shrew (S. yukonicus),
is only known from a single specimen found at Galena on the Yukon River.
Shrews are solitary except when breeding, mainly terrestrial, and live under the grass and leaf litter. They are active throughout the year and burrow through the
snow during the winter. Most shrews prefer moist habitats, and the water shrew is often found in streams, ponds, and marshes.
The breeding season is from March to August. Two to 10 young are born after a 17 to 28 day gestation period. The young are born naked and blind in a nest of
grass. The young are weaned after 3 weeks. Females generally have several litters per year. Shrews live from 12 to 18 months.
Food and predators: Shrews eat insects, spiders and other small invertebrates. Some species are dependent upon plant matter, but most will eat any kind of meat.
If two shrews are caught in a enclosed area, such as a tin can, one will kill and eat the other. In western Interior Alaska, shrews will feed on blackfish that have
come to the surface at holes in frozen-over lakes.
Shrews are taken by a variety of weasels, marten, fox, domestic cats, and other shrews. Because of their odor they may be left and not eaten after they are killed.
Great horned, great gray, boreal, and hawk owls have all been recorded preying on shrews in Alaska.
Shrews have a variety of parasites on and in them. Fleas and mites live on their outer surface and nematodes and cestodes live within them. One parasite which
lives within the diaphragm of shrews spends part of its life cycle infecting marten.
Conservation and management: Shrews are unclassified game in Alaska with no closed season and no bag limit. In agricultural areas they are beneficial because
they may eat insect pests. In some areas shrews are a pest because they will eat any meat and are able to climb up on shelves and eat meat which has been left
uncovered.
With the possible exception of the Pribilof Island shrew, none of Alaska's shrews have any conservation problems. If the habitat is vastly altered, the Pribilof Island
shrew, which is restricted to St Paul Island of the Pribilof Island group, may become rare.
Scientists still debate over the identity and genetic relationships of some shrew species. As a result, the specific names have been changing and older publications
may have different names for our shrews. Scientists who study shrews use pitfall cans to catch them. There are still many particulars about Alaska's shrews which
are unknown such as exact distribution, breeding cycles, and numbers.
Text: Tim Osborne
Illustration: Katherine Hocker
1994 

Lesser white-toothed shrew fact file
DescriptionBiologyRangeHabitatStatusThreatsConservationFind out moreGlossaryReferencesPrint factsheet
Top
Description

Kingdom	Animalia
Phylum	Chordata
Class	Mammalia
Order	Eulipotyphla
Family	Soricidae
Genus	Crocidura (1)
The lesser white-toothed shrew (Crocidura suaveolens) is the smallest of the 'white-toothed shrews' (4); it lacks the deposition of iron in the tips of the teeth seen in red-toothed shrews (5). The upper surface of the body is greyish or reddish brown in colour; and the underside is paler (2). The tail is covered in short bristly hairs (2), and long whisker-like (4) white hairs (2). Although smaller and lighter, this species is very similar in appearance to the greater white-toothed shrew (Crocidura russula) (4), so much so that the only truly reliable method to distinguish between the two species is by examination of the teeth, and the relative sizes of the tail and hind feet (measurements above) (2).

FrenchCrocidure Des Jardins.SpanishMusara~na De Campo.SizeHead & body length: 50-75 mm (2)Tail length: 24-44 mm (2)Hind feet length: 10-13 mm (2)Weight3-7 g (2)
Biology

Like the greater white-toothed shrew, the lesser white-toothed shrew alternates bouts of activity with rest (4) throughout both the day and night (2), but activity peaks at dusk and dawn (2). It is typically a solitary species, but is not as aggressive as Sorex species (2). White-toothed shrews are also known as 'musk shrews' because they have a strong musky aroma. They are known to 'belly-mark' their home ranges by dragging their belly along the ground in order to scent-mark it (5).

As home ranges overlap, it is likely that it is not very territorial (2). It feeds on a variety of invertebrates (4) including small crustaceans that live amongst rocks on the seashore (5). They nest under logs and stones or in burrows (4). The breeding season extends from March to September, and females become receptive and conceive whilst they are still suckling the previous litter (2). This species has a greater reproductive output than any of the British red-toothed shrews, producing four to five litters a year, each comprising of one to six young (6). The young exhibit 'caravanning' behaviour (4); if the nest is disturbed, the female leads the young to a new nest site; the young follow her in a line, each one grasping the tail of the shrew in front by the tail (5). The average life span of this shrew is up to 18 months (2).

Top
Range

The lesser white-toothed shrew has a wide distribution in Europe, extends eastwards to Japan and also occurs in North Africa (2). It does not occur on mainland Britain, but is present on Jersey and Sark in the Channel Islands and is also found on the Scilly Isles (2), where it is thought to be represented by a subspecies known as the Scilly shrew (C. s. cassiteridum, endemic to the Scilly Isles (3). It is believed to have originally been introduced to the Scilly Isles (5) and has since evolved into a new subspecies.
Habitat

Occurs in a variety of habitats (4), favouring dry ground, and has even adapted to living on the seashore and grassy sand dunes in the Scilly Isles (5). Like the greater white-toothed shrew, it often occurs close to man, living around outbuildings (2).

More >>
Species found in a similar habitat
Common gull (Larus canus)
Common gull
(Larus canus)
Colchicum (Colchicum corsicum)
Colchicum
(Colchicum corsicum)
Lesser black-backed gull (Larus fuscus)
Lesser black-backed gull
(Larus fuscus)
Top
Status

The lesser white-toothed shrew is classified as Least Concern (LC) on the IUCN Red List (1). Protected under Schedule 6 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act, 1981 (3).

IUCN Red List species status ? Least Concern

Top
Threats

The lesser white-toothed shrew is not threatened at present, although like most shrews it is vulnerable to pesticide use, habitat loss and declines in prey availability (6).

Top
Conservation

All shrews are protected under the Wildlife and Countryside Act (3).
